Topline A hand recount of Georgia’s presidential race turned up more than 5,000 previously unreported votes on Monday and Tuesday, narrowing President-elect Joe Biden’s lead in the state to just under 13,000 votes, though officials have not identified any major problems that could overturn President Donald Trump’s projected loss in Georgia.
Key Facts County election officials are almost finished recounting every ballot in the state by hand, part of a risk-limiting audit that started last week and is slated to finish up by Wednesday night, Gabriel Sterling from the Georgia Secretary of State’s office said Tuesday.
During this recount, officials in both Floyd County and Fayette County discovered a total of just under 5,400 votes that were not reported due to unrelated human errors, slimming Biden’s lead from 14,112 votes to 12,929 as most of those extra votes went to Trump.
Most counties have seen few errors, Sterling said: Many reported zero difference between their initial tally and their recount, and some reported single-digit changes, most likely due to one-off mistakes during the counting process.
Trump’s campaign has latched onto the discoveries in Floyd and Fayette Counties, falsely presenting them as evidence of widespread irregularities, but Sterling says there is no evidence of fraud on a large enough scale to change the outcome of the race.
Crucial Quote “In every single election in the history of mankind, there will be illegal votes cast,” Sterling said earlier Tuesday. “We have seen nothing that indicates that there is such a high percentage [of illegal votes] that it would change the outcome of the vote.”
Key Background Biden defeated Trump in Georgia by a slim enough margin to prompt a full audit and hand recount. This process is unlikely to tip the race in Trump’s favor, however, because statewide recounts have historically changed the margins of a race by dozens or hundreds of votes, not the tens of thousands Trump will need to overtake Biden. Still, as Trump refuses to concede to Biden and promotes evidence-free conspiracy theories about voter fraud, his allies have treated the recount as an opportunity to recover from defeat by exposing supposed troves of illegal votes. Georgia Secretary of State Brad Raffensperger and his staff, including Sterling, have defended the election as fundamentally fair, and have worked to debunk some of the viral misinformation about vote-rigging in their state.
Tangent Raffensperger, a Republican, has faced pressure from members of his own party to somehow alter the recount process in Trump’s favor. Trump and his team have repeatedly denigrated him, and Georgia Sens. Kelly Loeffler (R) and David Perdue (R) unsuccessfully urged him to resign , citing unspecified management issues. Most notably, Raffensperger claimed Monday that Sen. Lindsey Graham (R-S.C.) implied he should find a way to throw out legal mail-in ballots, an allegation Graham denied. Raffensperger, for his part, believes Trump’s loss in Georgia is due to his criticism of mail-in voting, which may have depressed turnout.
Further Reading Nearly 2,800 more votes found as Georgia recount nears end (Atlanta Journal-Constitution)
Joe Walsh
I am a breaking news reporter at Forbes. Previously, I covered local news for the Boston Guardian, and I graduated from Tufts University in 2019. You can contact me at
… Read More
I am a breaking news reporter at Forbes. Previously, I covered local news for the Boston Guardian, and I graduated from Tufts University in 2019. You can contact me at jwalsh@forbes.com.