By BBC Monitoring
A Syrian Kurdish youth group operating in north-east Syria has denied a report that it kidnaps children to enlist them in its war efforts.
The Revolutionary Youth Movement in Syria (Kurdish: Tavgara Jiwanan Shorishger e Suriye) described allegations made by the UK-based Syrian Observatory for Human Rights (SOHR) that it was kidnapping and recruiting children as "baseless and untrue", in a statement carried by the Kurdish news website Firat News Agency (ANF) on 11 November.
The youth organisation is linked to the leading Syrian Kurdish Democratic Union Party (PYD). It is described by the Syria Direct website as a youth empowerment movement located in north-east Syria, known for its ties to the leftistKurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which is outlawed by Turkey.
Discussing the organisation’s activities in a report in September, Syria Direct said that after taking classes on the history of Kurdistan and issues important to Kurdish nationalism, followed by military training in the town of Rmeilan in Syria’s north-eastern Hasaka province, the children are divided into those who want to fight for the PKK and those who want to stay in north-east Syria to fight with the Kurdish-led Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF).
It was unclear at what age they would eventually begin fighting for these groups if at all, but Syria Direct’s report mentioned a case of an 11-year-old girl being recruited in relation to the youth group’s activities.
SOHR criticism, broader concerns
On 9 November, SOHR sources reported that members of the youth movement had kidnapped a 14-year-old child and driven him to their military camp in Hasaka province.
According to the war monitor, recruitment of children by the movement has led to widespread popular discontent in areas held by the self-proclaimed Kurdish-led Autonomous Administration of North and East Syria (NES).
Over the summer, SOHR had appealed to the NES and the Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) to comply with the Geneva Conventions they have signed, regarding the prohibition of recruiting or using children in armed conflicts.
On 13 July, theNES denied allegations that it recruits child soldiers. The defence bureau of the NES described the allegations made by the SOHR as "lies" and "devoid of truth".
"The NES is committed to all agreements made with the international community, especially the 29 June 2019 agreement with the UN which ends and bans the recruitment of children,” the statement added.
On the same day, in an official nine-point statement, theSDF ordered a series of measures to protect children, schools and educators from the effects of armed conflict and military operations in Syria, including moving their own troops away from such institutions.
It also stressed the right of children to education during war, the need to alleviate the effects of conflict on children, and aiding and protecting educational personnel in north-eastern Syria.
The United Nations, Human Rights Watch (HRW) and the US Department of Defense Office of the Inspector General have all noted in the past that the SDF recruited children into their ranks.
HRW said children as young as 13 have been recruited.
PKK links
The PYD, YPG (People's Protection Units) and YPJ (Women's Protection Units) forms are believed to be ideologically tied to the PKK. The latter two form the military backbone of the SDF.
The PYD along with the PKK and two other parties are members of the Kurdistan Communities Union (KCK), which is committed to implementing, incarcerated Kurdish leader Abdullah Ocalan’s ideology of democratic confederalism.
Source: BBC Monitoring 11 Nov 20
BBC Mon ME1 mjs/af