Topline The Buffalo Bills announced Saturday that star cornerback Josh Norman tested positive for the coronavirus and three other prominent players deemed to be in close contact with Norman were also placed on the reserve/Covid-19 list, which means all four will miss Sunday's game against the Arizona Cardinals.
Key Facts In accordance with the NFL's contact tracing protocols , tight end Tyler Kroft (who is tied for the team lead with three receiving touchdowns), starting cornerback Levi Wallace, and safety Dean Marlowe entered quarantine and did not travel to Arizona for Sunday's contest.
Norman returned to practice this week and was set to return to the lineup after missing the Bills previous three games due to a lingering hamstring injury.
To replace the four missing players, Buffalo called up LB Darron Lee, CB Daryl Worley, WR Jake Kumerow, S Josh Thomas and CB Dane Jackson from the practice squad.
Key Background: Earlier this season, backup tight end Dawson Knox tested positive for Covid-19, which resulted in Knox and three other tight ends being forced to miss Buffalo's victory over the New York Jets. With Kroft sidelined Sunday, Knox, the team's third-round pick last year, will be asked to step in and step up. Veteran TE Lee Smith will also likely be activated.
Tangent: The Pittsburgh Steelers activated starting quarterback Ben Roethlisberger and three other players from the reserve/COVID-19 list on Saturday. Roethlisberger is expected to start against the Cincinnati Bengals on Sunday afternoon.
Critical Quote: "You're always nervous," Roethlisberger said of spreading the virus. "My wife, we slept in opposite rooms. Things like that. My wife said, I don't care if we get it, but we don't want our kids to get it."
Further Reading:
Josh Norman tests positive for COVID-19, 3 other players placed on reserve/COVID-19 list (NFL.com)
Pittsburgh Steelers QB Ben Roethlisberger activated from reserve/COVID-19 list, expected to start Sunday (ESPN)
Full coverage and live updates on the Coronavirus
Tommy Beer
I'm a New York-based news desk reporter for Forbes covering sports, politics and business. Please feel free to contact me via email (tsbeer7 [@] gmail.com) or Twitter
… Read More
I'm a New York-based news desk reporter for Forbes covering sports, politics and business. Please feel free to contact me via email (tsbeer7 [@] gmail.com) or Twitter (@TommyBeer).