Hawaii Reopens for Travel from the United States Hawaii reopened to American tourists in October, provided they present a negative Covid-19 test upon arrival and take another test within 72 hours of departure. Hotels and restaurants, however, are operating on their own timetables. Many luxury resorts are opening this week while others are welcoming guests in time for the holidays. Here’s what you need to know about traveling to Hawaii.
Virgin Hyperloop Takes First Passengers for a Test Ride The dream of high-speed transportation that can go from Los Angeles to San Francisco or New York to Washington in about 30 minutes, got a little closer to reality this week when Virgin Hyperloop took its first human passengers for a ride on its test track in Las Vegas.
One of President Trump’s Helicopters Is for Sale It’s not exactly Marine One, but a helicopter reportedly owned by Donald Trump is now for sale. The Sikorsky s76-B was manufactured in 1989 and has flown some 6,200 hours. In addition to an executive cabin, the seats have “gold” seatbelt fittings, but there is no WiFi onboard so passengers can’t tweet from the sky. As for the cost, the seller’s listing is wide open. “Call for a price,” it reads. “Make an offer.”
MORE FOR YOU Winter Travel Alert: Biden Covid Advisor Floats Nationwide Shutdown For 4 To 6 Weeks Tripadvisor Labels Thai Hotel With Warning—After Guest Does Jail Time For Leaving Bad Review Do These Changes Hint Canada’s Border Might Reopen? Travel Wise The warning against end-of-the-year travel won’t deter everyone. So if you plan to visit family and friends over the next few weeks, these are the 5 questions to ask before traveling for the holidays.
What Should You Tip When Traveling Abroad? Here’s an important tip when it comes to leaving a tip—not all countries view gratuities the same way. Here’s a quick guide to tipping for international travelers .
Passport by ForbesLife chronicles the latest in luxury travel, drinking and dining, fashion—and life's other indulgences. Click here to sign up for its weekly newsletter.
Passport by ForbesLife
A first-class guide to luxury travel, drinking and dining, fashion—and life’s other indulgences.