The Anti-Terrorism Court (ATC) here on Wednesday also convicted two other JuD leaders, including the brother-in-law of Saeed, in terror financing cases. Share Article A A A The Anti-Terrorism Court (ATC) here on Wednesday also convicted two other JuD leaders, including the brother-in-law of Saeed, in terror financing cases.
A Pakistani anti-terrorism court has handed down 32 years of imprisonment to Yahya Mujahid, spokesperson of Mumbai attack mastermind Hafiz Saeed’s Jammat-ud-Dawah (JuD) terror group, in two terror financing cases.
The Anti-Terrorism Court (ATC) here on Wednesday also convicted two other JuD leaders, including the brother-in-law of Saeed, in terror financing cases.
“ATC Judge Ijaz Ahmad Buttar handed down 32 years imprisonment to JuD spokesperson Yahya Mujahid in two FIRs. Prof Zafar Iqbal and Prof Hafiz Abdul Rehman Makki (brother-in-law of Saeed) were awarded 16 and one-year jail terms in two cases, a court official said.
He said that the two other JuD leaders — Abdul Salam bin Muhammad and Luqman Shah -- were indicted in more terror financing cases.
The court directed the prosecution to present its witnesses on November 16.
The suspects were presented in the court in high security and media was not allowed to enter the court premises during the case proceedings.
Last week, the ATC Lahore convicted JuD’s Hafiz Abdul Rehman Makki, Zafar Iqbal and Muhammad Ashraf in two more cases of terror financing registered by the Counter Terrorism Department (CTD) of Punjab police.
Zafar Iqbal and Muhammad Ashraf have been given a collective imprisonment of 16 years each under different sections of the Anti-Terrorism Act. Makki has been sentenced to one-year imprisonment in a case with a fine of ₹170,000.
In September last year, the ATC Lahore handed down over 16 years imprisonment to Prof Zafar Iqbal and Hafiz Abdus Salam bin Muhammad and one-and-a-half-year sentence to Makki in a terror financing case.
In February last year, Saeed had been sentenced to jail for 11 years on terror finance charges by an ATC in Lahore.
The ATC sentenced Saeed and his close aide Zafar Iqbal to five-and-a-half years each in two cases. A total of 11 years sentence will run concurrently. Saeed is serving his term in Lahore’s Kot Lakhpat jail. He was arrested in July last year.
The CTD of Punjab police had registered 23 FIRs against Saeed and his accomplices on the charges of terror financing in different cities of the province.
Saeed-led JuD is the front organisation for Lashkar-e-Taiba which is responsible for carrying out the 2008 Mumbai attack that killed 166 people, including six Americans.
The US named Saeed as a Specially Designated Global Terrorist, and the US, since 2012, has offered a USD 10-million reward for information that brings Saeed to justice.
He was listed as a terrorist under the UN Security Council Resolution 1267 in December 2008. You have reached your limit for free articles this month. To get full access, please subscribe. Already have an account ? Sign in Show Less Plan
Start your 14 days free trial. Sign Up A letter from the Editor
Dear reader,
We have been keeping you up-to-date with information on the developments in India and the world that have a bearing on our health and wellbeing, our lives and livelihoods, during these difficult times. To enable wide dissemination of news that is in public interest, we have increased the number of articles that can be read free, and extended free trial periods. However, we have a request for those who can afford to subscribe: please do. As we fight disinformation and misinformation, and keep apace with the happenings, we need to commit greater resources to news gathering operations. We promise to deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda. A letter from the Editor
Dear subscriber,
Thank you!
Your support for our journalism is invaluable. It’s a support for truth and fairness in journalism. It has helped us keep apace with events and happenings.
The Hindu has always stood for journalism that is in the public interest. At this difficult time, it becomes even more important that we have access to information that has a bearing on our health and well-being, our lives, and livelihoods. As a subscriber, you are not only a beneficiary of our work but also its enabler.
We also reiterate here the promise that our team of reporters, copy editors, fact-checkers, designers, and photographers will deliver quality journalism that stays away from vested interest and political propaganda.
Suresh Nambath SUBSCRIBE TO THE VIEW FROM INDIA NEWSLETTER Submit