By BBC Monitoring
A South Korea company has been accused of deliberately burning forests in West Papua to expand palm oil land.
The Korindo Group reportedly controls more land in Papua than any other conglomerate. Kompas reported that the company has cleared more than 57,000 hectares of forest, nearly the size of Seoul.
Korindo is a subsidiary of a South Korean conglomerate that has been operating in Indonesia since 1969 according to their website. They initially focused on hardwood developed but have since switched to palm oil plantations. Although it has a main office in Jakarta, the majority of its workers are in Eastern Indonesia.
Korindo has denied these allegations, stating is has a zero deforestation policy. They have blamed local communities living near the timber concessions of "lighting fires because they hunt wild animals that live in the forest."
The issue was first widely discussed on Twitter, after several influential users shared a video of the South Korean company allegedly burning forests, as seen in the hashtags #SavePapua, #SavePapuaForest, #SaveHutanPapua (Save Papua's Forests) and #SaveHutanIndonesia (Save Indonesia's forests).
Human rights lawyer and West Papua activist Veronica Koman urged fans of Korean pop music to help make the story go viral as they have with other issues this year.
"South Korean company @korindogroup grabbed Indigenous land in West Papua. Rainforest the size of Seoul has been razed. This investigation suggests that fires were deliberately lit to make way for palm oil planting. This is ethnocide and ecocide."
In a following tweet she said, "K-pop stans please do your magic"
Shortly after this #SavePapua became a top trending hashtag both within Indonesia and globally. Most of the Tweets were written in English by an Indonesian audience.
@secretbabylion: "The government really went too far. speechless. now who's gonna save the earth from extreme climate change if it's not the forests? really? so ignorant. at this point, capitalism really wrecks my country to its bone"
@femorion: "CLIMATE EMERGENCY. The forest in papua is being harmed and exploited for projects and business means. We need to protect our land. Spread the news."
@jamaisbee
"60.000 hectares forest in Papua which is same size as Seoul are burned by south korea company to open up an area for oil palm. This is horrible!"
A number of posts mentioned that they were K-Pop fans and hoped to see South Korea take accountability given the cultural influence it has in Indonesia.
@Unkown_blibli: "We are always happy and support the South Korean country, we even like the South Korean industry, but why? You are so cruel to our papua forest !! Why are you upsetting us? You may influence our world with your culture, but not for this !!!"
Some users pointed to this as an example of why West Papua should have sovereignty, or at least more authority over its resources.
@ rahung
"Papua should be independent. If not, not only will the forests be destroyed, but the people will also become 'extinct.' Like Indians in America and Aboriginals in Australia for example"
However, others saw the protection of Papuan forests through the lens of pan-Indonesianism and the importance of protecting the environment throughout the archipelago nation.
This is not the first time that the South Korean company has been accused of burning forests in Papua.
Investigations from 2016 also indicated the systematic and widespread use of fire by the Korindo Group. Results showed that Korindo had cleared more than 50,000 hectares of forest for palm oil plantations in remote provinces within Papua and Maluku.
It remains difficult for journalists to investigate current affairs in Papua due to a near ban on international journalists and tight restrictions for domestic ones.
Source: BBC Monitoring in Indonesian 17 Nov 20
BBC Mon AS1 ASDel pj