Stories being covered today by BBC Monitoring from Chinese broadcast, press and social media sources.
CORONAVIRUS
To read the best of our Covid-19 coverage please clickhere. To set up thematic feeds of our content on the pandemic, pleasesee here for details.
Moderna vaccine trial 'breakthrough'
Chinese state media websites have carried mostly routine factual reporting citing foreign media on a new Covid-19 vaccine showing nearly 95 per cent effectiveness against the coronavirus, according to early data from US pharmaceutical company Moderna.
However, a commentary on privately-run Shanghai-based news and commentary website Guancha.cn (Observer) criticised US President Donald Trump's tweet on 16 November stating that "these great discoveries, which will end the China Plague, all took place on my watch!"
"Two hours after Moderna announced the effectiveness of the vaccine, the current US President Trump, who has been busy making 'election fraud' accusations, also responded to the news on Twitter. This time, he still did not forget to falsely call the novel coronavirus epidemic the 'China plague'," Guancha.cn columnist Qi Qian commented late on 16 November.
Covid-19 Analysis: China deploys vaccine diplomacy to reach out globally
Media highlight BRICS Covid-19 cooperation
Cooperation on a Covid-19 novel coronavirus vaccine and post-pandemic economic recovery will be key highlights of the upcoming 12th annual BRICS summit of leaders from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa, according to Chinese state media. Chinese President Xi Jinping will attend the video summit on 17 November.
In an op-ed in the ruling Chinese Communist Party's (CCP) newspaper Renmin Ribao (People's Daily) on 17 November, Chinese Ambassador to Russia Zhang Hanhui defended Beijing's "transparency" and handling of the Covid-19 outbreak. Zhang called for the BRICS nations to "resolutely oppose the politicisation of the epidemic, the labelling of the virus, and the stigmatisation of other countries" amid "rising protectionism and unilateralism". Zhang made no direct mention of criticism of China's Covid-19 response from the US, Australia and other countries.
State media reports have not been noted to touch upon Brazilian President Jair Bolsonaro's criticism of a Covid-19 vaccine being tested in Brazil because of its Chinese links or his assertion that the vaccine will not be purchased by his country. The trial of the vaccine in Brazil was suspended recently after a "severe adverse incident" before resuming.
Chinese media say Brazil's suspension of vaccine trial politically motivated
Speculation on Trump's 'last-minute crackdown' amid Huawei sell-off
Chinese telecoms giant Huawei's move on 17 November to sell-off its budget-price Honor smartphone brand to a Chinese consortium over 30 agents and dealers is the top story on private business news website Yicai and other Chinese media. An article by the Global Times's English website on 17 November said the sell-off was aimed at ensuring Honor's survival amid an ongoing US "political crackdown" and escalating sanctions against Chinese tech firms.
In a statement, Huawei said its "consumer business has been under tremendous pressure". Separately, the Global Times again asserted that China is ready for an act of "final madness" from US President Donald Trump during his final weeks in office. It cited a 15 November unconfirmed report by US news website Axios on how Trump may impose sanctions or restrict trade with more Chinese companies, government entities and officials for alleged complicity in human rights violations in Xinjiang or Hong Kong, or for threats to US national security, according to senior US administration officials "with direct knowledge of the plans".
State-run English-language newspaper China Daily, which targets international readers, said the US had provided no evidence to back its stand that the firms were exploiting US technology to strengthen China's military. "The US is simply politicising high-tech competition in areas where it fears being second best," its editorial said late on 16 November.
Updated: Timeline: Tracing Huawei's journey into global controversy
Embassy rejects Czech concern over disqualified Hong Kong lawmakers
The Chinese embassy in Prague has rebuked Czech Republic's Ministry of Foreign Affairs for raising concerns over Beijing's disqualification of four pro-democracy lawmakers in Hong Kong last week. In a Czech and English statement on 16 November, the Czech Ministry of Foreign Affairs said it was "deeply concerned by Beijing's arbitrary decision", calling it a "breach of China's international obligations to Hong Kong", which would further undermine the city's "autonomy, political pluralism and freedoms".
On 16 November, a statement on the Chinese embassy's website voiced Beijing's "strong dissatisfaction and resolute opposition" against Prague "grossly interfering" in Hong Kong affairs and China's internal affairs, private Beijing-based news website Jiemian and public broadcaster Radio Television Hong Kong (RTHK) reported on 17 November.
Explainer: Hong Kong poll delay sparks political storm
Hong Kong 4 June vigil organisers accused of violating security law
Local activists are rejecting accusations by a prominent Beijing-based academic that they violated Hong Kong's national security law by organising the city's annual candlelight vigil to commemorate the victims of Beijing's 4 June Tiananmen military crackdown.
On 16 November, Tian Feilong, an associate professor at Beihang University's Law School in Beijing and director of the Chinese Association of Hong Kong and Macau Studies, accused the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of Patriotic Democratic Movements of China of violating the national security law by "participating in subversive political activities in the name of democracy and patriotism". In a 16 November commentary published in pro-Beijing newspaper Hong Kong Commercial Daily, Tian called the Alliance a "colour revolution" organisation colluding with foreign forces. As the national security law is not retroactive, Tian also called for authorities to exhaust legal means to prosecute and punish the Alliance.
On 17 November, Apple Daily, a pro-democracy newspaper fiercely critical of Beijing, quoted Richard Tsoi, vice-chairperson of the Alliance, hitting back at Tian's "baseless" accusations as "ridiculous and slanderous". Tsoi also stressed that the Alliance's work and financing are transparent.
Analysis: Hong Kong social media users weigh up UK citizenship offer
Social buzz
Social media users on China's tightly censored, Twitter-like platform Sina Weibo discussed a tweet by US President Donald Trump where he declared victory in the November presidential polls.
US President Donald Trump's 16 November tweet declaring in capitals "I WON THE ELECTION!" has gone viral on Sina Weibo. The hashtag "Trump tweets I won the election" had around 770m views and 37,000 comments as of 0445 gmt on 17 November.
"Doctor, come on! He's getting worse," said the most popular user comment in the thread, with more than 66,570 likes. Other popular user comments included, "Such a person has actually been president for four years" and "It's [Trump's tweet] been tagged as 'Official sources called this [election] differently' again. I feel sorry for Chuanchuan".
Trump is known affectionately as "Chuanchuan" on Chinese social media due to his Chinese name "Chuanpu".
Coming up
Chinese President Xi Jinping will attend the BRICS video summit of leaders from Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa on 17 November at the invitation of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
A piece on Chinese tech company Huawei selling its budget brand Honor amid controversies and ban in many countries.
Source: BBC Monitoring
BBC Mon AS1 sl/rm/prt