By BBC Monitoring
The challenge of misinformation about the Covid-19 vaccine, distorted information about Nato presence in Baltic states, and the implications of the Karabakh deal were among the main topics covered by Latvian newspapers and websites on 11-12 November.
Covid-19: misinformation about vaccine
In an interview with the Latvian Television, Janis Sarts, director of the Nato Centre for Strategic Communication of Excellence (Stratcom), predicted that the next global fight against misinformation would be related to the Covid-19 vaccine and the need to vaccinate when it becomes available, LSM public broadcasting portal reported. Sarts concluded that, unlike the situation in the spring, Latvia is now a typical European country with a lot of false information and widespread conspiracy theories regarding the spread of Covid-19. He emphasised the need to educate the public and said that changes in legislation were needed to crack down on distributors of deliberate misrepresentations for self-interest, LSM said. (LSM, 11 November)
Covid-19: Lack of health workers
Karlis Racenis, head of the Latvian Young Doctors Association, announced on the Week in Focus programme of the popular TVNet news portal that Latvia "will not see the day when hospitals are overcrowded and fill stadiums with patients, because due to lack of human resources there will be no one to treat them". He also acknowledged that despite the various organisational and procedure algorithms already implemented in hospitals, psycho-emotional tension and burnout were becoming more common among physicians. Racenis urged the population to be very vigilant and said that Latvian health workers want to avoid a situation like in Belgium where "medical staff with Covid treated other infected people." (TVNet, 11 November)
Pro-Kremlin media target Nato activity in Baltics
The leading news portal Delfi focuses on the ways how pro-Kremlin information platforms use Nato military exercises and presence on Latvian territory to repeatedly raise doubts about Latvia's transatlantic partnership and discredit Nato's image both in the Baltic states and elsewhere. The portal analyses the Georgian version of the Sputnik disinformation site and Sputnik's allegations on YouTube that the Baltic population is suffering due to the alliance's continued presence and military training. The Covid-19 crisis is also cited, emphasising that military drills have been taking place independently of the pandemic, ostensibly showing distorted priorities and increasing fear among the population, says Delfi. The portal notes that Sputnik has made great efforts to present to Georgians the consequences the country and its people could face if the country continues to cooperate with the alliance. (Delfi, 12 November)
US foreign policy prospects
TVNet news portal summarises an expert discussion on US foreign policy under the next administration. Marcis Balodis, a researcher at the Eastern European Policy Studies Centre, and Otto Tabuns, director of the Baltic Security Fund, paid particular attention to the potential impact of the change of US presidency on security in the Baltic region. In the president's office, Biden is expected to introduce more predictability and transparency into US foreign policy, the experts agreed. Tabuns said he expected the next US president to renew arms control agreements with Russia. Noting that Biden would still have to play a political game with Russia and China simultaneously, Balodis said this means the USA will need a strong Europe. (TVNet, 11 November)
Karabakh deal
On the IMHOClub Pro-Russian online forum, journalist Yury Alexeyev describes sarcastically the disturbances in the Armenian capital following the signing of the Karabakh deal with Azerbaijan. Alexeyev blames the 2018 Armenian 'Orange revolution' for the current situation, saying that 'colour' revolutions are always followed by a catastrophic weakening of the state, and catastrophic losses of both territories and people. (IMHOClub, 12 November)
The Karabakh deal is favourable for everyone except Armenia, and one of the results of the war will be the end of the political career of Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan and pro-Western forces, the centrist daily Diena writes in an editorial. In Azerbaijan, the outcome of the war is taken as an impressive victory, although there are some who believe that the country has missed an opportunity to wind up the Karabakh problem altogether, it notes. Turkey is also a winner - although not invited to the talks, it has been able to increase its influence in Azerbaijan during the conflict, mainly through military support. Russia is an even bigger winner, since the arrival of its "peacekeepers" in the ethnic Armenian rump of Nagorno-Karabakh turns it into a de facto territory under Russian mandate, and there is no doubt that a Russian military base will soon appear on what is legally Azerbaijani territory, the daily expands. (Diena, 12 November)
Source: Latvian press highlights 12 Nov 20
BBC Mon EU1 em/aj