The following is a selection of reports and headlines from news bulletins on the evening of 11 November and newspaper front pages on 12 November 2020.
Turkey to monitor peace in Karabakh
President Recep Tayyip Erdogan said on 11 November that Turkey would join Russia to monitor the implementation of the Moscow-mediated peace deal between Armenia and Azerbaijan in Nagorno-Karabakh.
Erdogan’s comments made during his address to the ruling Justice and Development Party (AKP) parliamentary group, was broadcast live by major news channels.
State broadcaster TRT Haber (1700 GMT) and pro-government A Haber news channel (1600 GMT) showed part of the speech again in their evening bulletins.
Erdogan’s comments also made headlines in pro-government newspapers the next day.
“Turkey will be in Karabakh,” Sabah said.
Milliyet said “Turkish soldiers will monitor the ceasefire in Karabakh.”
“The West is out of the game. Turkey is the new power,” Aksam’s headline ran, quoting foreign media reports emphasising Turkey’s role in Karabakh.
Leftist opposition Birgun newspaper noted Russia’s “cautious” approach to cooperating with Turkey. “Moscow wants this cooperation to be limited to Azerbaijani soil,” it said.
Secularist opposition Cumhuriyet newspaper reported the competing statements from Turkey and Russia. While President Erdogan said there would be “joint peace forces”, Kremlin said “cooperation with Ankara is in Azerbaijani soil”, the paper added.
Cumhuriyet’s pro-Russia columnist Mehmet Ali Guller was quoted as saying there were three winners and three losers in Karabakh. He argued that Azerbaijan, Russia and Turkey were “winners” while the US, Westernism and Americanism within the Armenian government were the “losers”.
Nationalist opposition Yenicag newspaper quoted Armenian analyst Richard Giragosian as saying “Russia is the winner” of the conflict. Moscow aims to have a “more pronounced military presence on the field”, Giragosian said.
Turkey’s top politicians support Azerbaijan
Turkey’s top officials have hailed Azerbaijan’s “victory” following the peace deal.
Defence Minister Hulusi Akar visited Azerbaijan’s capital Baku and said the operation ended in 44 days but would be “talked about for 44 years”.
His visit and comments were reported in a number of news channels, including mainstream Haberturk and TRT Haber on 11 November as well as in newspapers the next day.
Government-ally Nationalist Movement Party (MHP) leader Devlet Bahceli also lauded Azerbaijan, saying Armenia “paid for the blood it shed”. He described the situation as a “historic revenge”.
Bahceli’s statement was broadcast on TRT Haber and A Haber on 11 November as well in pro-government Hurriyet newspaper on 12 November.
Explainer: What is behind Turkey’s ramped up support for Azerbaijan?
Turkish-Azerbaijani military ties under spotlight amid Nagorno-Karabakh clashes
Armenian prime minister ‘disappears’
On 12 November, Turkish newspapers reported on Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan’s “disappearance” after signing the peace deal.
“The opposition trying to topple Pashinyan is looking for him at every corner,” Hurriyet newspaper said, under the headline “Where has Pashinyan gone?”
Sabah said that Pashinyan “disappeared after his defeat”.
“Azerbaijan clearing Karabakh from occupiers with its iron fist is shaking Armenian Prime Minister Pashinyan’s seat,” staunchly pro-government Yeni Safak said, voicing claims that he is “hiding in a shelter”.
“The rage on the streets in Yerevan is not stopping,” liberal conservative Karar said, reporting on the protests.
Turkey-US ties under Biden administration
Michael Carpenter, a foreign policy adviser to US President-elect Joe Biden, was extensively quoted in the Turkish media as saying that they do not want to “push Turkey into a corner” or impose sanctions that would lead to an “economic collapse”.
“According to Biden’s foreign policy adviser Carpenter, Turkey should change its policy,” Cumhuriyet said, quoting the official’s remarks that there would be “negative outcomes” if Turkey continued to follow its policy on Russian S-400 missiles.
Meanwhile, TRT Haber and Haberturk on 11 November quoted MHP leader Bahceli’s comments criticising main opposition Republican People’s Party (CHP) chair Kemal Kilicdaroglu for congratulating Biden on his win “before the official results”.
Yenicag quoted Bahceli as saying that they expect the US to “not look down” on Turkey.
US election: Key narratives from Turkey 3-11 Nov 20
Analysis: Turkey pushes to fulfil global ambitions amid US retreat under Trump
Explainer: What is behind the anti-Biden sentiment in Turkey?
Erdogan denies cabinet reshuffle claims
President Erdogan refuted cabinet reshuffle claims in the wake of Treasury and Finance Minister Berat Albayrak’s resignation and vowed a new era in Turkey’s economy through financial and macroeconomic stability.
"News reports on a cabinet reshuffle or changing the structures of some ministries are pure speculations," he said on 11 November.
Erdogan also thanked Albayrak, who is his son-in-law, for his service, adding Lutfi Elvan has been appointed as the new finance minister as of 9 November.
His statement was covered extensively.
"Very important messages for economy," Hurriyet said.
"Those who trust Turkey will profit," Erdogan was quoted as saying in Sabah’s main headline.
Yeni Safak reported Erdogan’s statements and said that "it starts a new struggle in every field". "First priority is the economy," its headline ran.
Meanwhile, Cumhuriyet said in its main story that Erdogan "got angry over the cabinet reshuffle claims”. "Erdogan grew aware of legal and economic troubles," the paper also said.
Karar said Erdogan’s statements "relieved the markets". Leftist opposition Birgun suggested that the "entire burden of the crisis will be pushed on citizens”.
Meanwhile, nationalist opposition Sozcu newspaper said as long as the judiciary is not “repaired”, who leads the economic administration will not make a difference.
Source: BBC Monitoring 12 Nov 20
BBC Mon EU1 ob/bea/pe