FOLLOWING IS A BBCM SELECTION OF MAJOR NEWS HIGHLIGHTS FROM BANGLADESH'S BENGALI-LANGUAGE PRESS, WEBSITES ON 11 NOVEMBER 2020.
Bangladesh Pratidin
Nurses allegedly pretended to attend to dead police officer
Ruma Akhtar, a cook employed with the private hospital, Mind Aid, in Dhaka said that nurses were brought in posing as doctors and pretended to revive senior assistant police superintendent, Anisul Karim, after he was allegedly assaulted by hospital staff which resulted in his death. Speaking to correspondents on 10 November, Akhtar said that to fool Karim's family, oxygen was given to Karim, who was already dead, by three nurses who were not doctors. The report said the same was apparently captured on CCTV footage which has gone viral. [Online, Approximate Words: 505]
Accused in Sylhet custodial death case sent on remand
Akbar Hossain Bhuiyan, the main accused in the custodial death of Rayhan Ahmad, had allegedly tried to bribe local resident Rahim Uddin and five of his associates 2m taka [23,645 dollars] for not handing him over to the police as he tried to cross over to India, the report said. Bhuiyan has been sent to remand for seven days for interrogation in the case filed for allegedly torturing Raihan Ahmed to death at Bandar Bazar police outpost in Sylhet. The court of Sylhet Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (CMM) sent the accused to remand after he was produced in court on 10 November. [Online, Approximate Words: 462]
Action against people involved in officer's death: Home Minister
Minister of Home Affairs Asaduzzaman Khan on 11 November said that action will be taken against those found to be involved in the death of Senior Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Anisul Karim who was allegedly beaten to death by staff of a private hospital in Dhaka. "Investigation against the hospital and its employees is going on. The health department will be informed in this regard if it is needed," Khan said. [Online, Approximate Words: 115]
[Bangladesh Pratidin is Bangladesh's largest-circulation Bengali-language daily, which generally backs the ruling Awami League on domestic and international issues. Although, the paper often provides prominent coverage to opposition Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). The daily is run by East-West media group that is part of Bashundhara Group of companies.]
Manab Zamin
ACC files money laundering case against lawmaker, wife
The Anti-Corruption Commission (ACC) has filed a case of money laundering against Laxmipur-2 Member of Parliament (MP) Mohammad Shahid Islam, alias Kazi Papul, his wife and four others. ACC Deputy Director Mohammad Salauddin filed the case of money laundering against Papul and others on 11 November. [Online, Approximate Words: 320]
PM stresses on efforts to eradicate poverty, protect planet
Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina on 10 November called upon global leaders to make multilateral efforts in unison to lessen inequity, eradicate poverty and protect the planet. "The Covid-19 pandemic is a stark reminder that no one is safe until everyone is safe. In order to reduce inequality, eradicate poverty and protect our planet by reducing carbon emissions, we need to work together and reinforce our multilateral efforts," she said. A pre-recorded video speech of Hasina was aired at an event in support of multilateralism titled "Call for action to reinforce multilateralism" organised by the government of Spain. [Online, Approximate Words: 281]
[Manab Zamin is a major daily tabloid newspaper in Bangladesh, published from Dhaka in Bengali language. It says it is ranked among the Top 500 newspaper websites in the world. The newspaper is also the only Bangladeshi publication to boast credentials and affiliations.]
Dainik Jugantor
Brother of officer allegedly killed in hospital demands probe
Brother of senior assistant police superintendent, Anisul Karim, who was allegedly beaten to death by staff of a private hospital in Dhaka, said that his brother was wilfully murdered and justice must be done to him. Speaking to the media on 10 November, Karim's brother, Rezaul Karim, said that Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and Inspector General of Police (IGP) [Benazir Ahmed] must ensure a fair investigation and the guilty must be punished at the earliest. [Online, Approximate Words: 315]
Court upholds death sentence for husband for dowry death
Bangladesh High Court upheld the death sentence of Aminul Islam who was convicted of killing his wife for dowry. A High Court bench of Justice Shahidul Karim and Justice Mohammad Akhtaruzzaman also dismissed an appeal for amnesty by Islam on 11 November. [Online, Approximate Words: 223]
[Dainik Jugantor is a popular Bengali daily with a circulation of about 300,000 copies. The daily is published by the Jamuna Group, one of Bangladesh's prominent industrial conglomerates. The daily has been at the receiving end of several defamation suits by ministers and politicians of the ruling Bangladesh Awami League party for highlighting corruption in different sectors.]
Prothom Alo
Police say private mental hospital running without doctors
Police have said that Mind Aid Psychiatry and De-Addiction Hospital in Dhaka's Adabor area was being run by the board of directors, co-ordinators, co-managers and ward boys, who were not qualified in any way to handle cases of mental illness and addiction. Besides, the hospital does not have any license from the Department of Narcotics or legal documents, which are mandatory to run a mental hospital, the police added. [Online, Approximate Words: 830]
[Prothom Alo is the second largest circulated Bengali daily in Bangladesh. The daily does not exhibit a particular political leaning, but sometimes criticises the ruling Bangladesh Awami League party over issues such as corruption, curbs on media freedom and alleged failure to curb militancy. The daily is run by industrial and marketing conglomerate Transcom Group Limited, which also owns English-language newspaper The Daily Star.]
Kaler Kantho
Police chief promises action over officer's hospital death
Inspector General of Police (IGP) Benazir Ahmad said on 11 November that everyone involved in the killing of senior assistant police superintendent, Anisul Karim, in a Dhaka hospital will be brought under the ambit of law. Police Headquarters said that Ahmad's instructions have been instantly acted upon and all steps have been taken to arrest the suspects in the case in order to ensure that incidents like these do not reoccur anywhere in the country. Karim, who was taken to Mind Aid Hospital in Dhaka for treatment of some mental health issues, was allegedly beaten to death by hospital staff on 9 November. [Online, Approximate Words: 198]
Government, poll body must take lessons from US elections: BNP
Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) secretary general Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir on 10 November said that the Awami League government and the Election Commission could take lessons from the recent presidential election in the United States. While speaking at a press conference at the party chairperson's office in Gulshan area in Dhaka to discuss upcoming parliamentary by-election in Dhaka-18 and Sirajganj-1constituencies, Alamgir said that the government was holding power illegally and destroying democracy in the country. They should take lesson from the US election and that the Election Commission in Bangladesh should see how the poll body in the US conducted the elections, Alamgir said. [Page 3: Approximate Words: 152]
[Kaler Kantho is one of the most popular Bengali newspapers in Bangladesh. It is an enterprise of the East West Media Group, a subsidiary of Bangladesh's business conglomerate Bashundhara Group. The group also owns daily Bangladesh Pratidin, Daily Sun newspaper, News24 television channel, Radio Capital and online news portal Banglanews24. The daily is considered to be liberal in its editorial policy.]
Dhaka Tribune (Bangla)
Police arrest hospital director over senior officer's death
Muhammad Niaz Morshed, director of Mind Aid Psychiatry and De-Addiction Hospital in Dhaka, has been arrested in connection with the death of Senior Assistant Superintendent of Police (ASP) Anisul Karim, who was allegedly beaten to death by the hospital's staff on 9 November. Mrittonjay Dey Sajal, additional deputy commissioner of Tejgaon Division Police, said Morshed was arrested from the National Institute of Neurosciences and Hospital in Dhaka on 10 November. [Online, Approximate Words: 214]
[Dhaka Tribune (Bangla) is a sister concern of the popular Bangladeshi English-language daily Dhaka Tribune. The paper was started in 2013. The newspaper is known to be liberal and impartial.]
Samakal
Awami League youth activist hacked to death in front of wife
An activist of the Awami Jubo League [youth wing of ruling Awami League] has been hacked to death in broad daylight in Comilla [in south-east of Dhaka] city. The deceased, Zillur Rahman (52), was a resident of the municipality's ward 25 and was also a candidate for the post of vice-president for the ward's Jubo League unit. According to police and witnesses, the incident took place in front of Dhanpur Fonka Brick Field on 11 November, when about 10 to 15 men riding on motorcycles obstructed Zillur and attacked him with sharp weapons, leaving him critically injured. The attack happened in the presence of his wife. [Online, Approximate Words: 245]
BNP needs to take lessons from US elections: Transport Minister
Minister of Road Transport and Bridges and Awami League General Secretary, Obaidul Quader, said on 11 November that if victory is guaranteed in elections for the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP) then it will immediately say that the Election Commission has conducted a fair election. Reacting to BNP Secretary General Mirza Fakhrul Islam Alamgir's comment that the government and the Election Commission must take lessons from the elections in the United States, Quader said that it is time that the BNP took some lessons as the government and the poll body have always followed a clean and transparent electoral process. [Online, Approximate Words: 311]
Bangladeshi cricketer passes fitness test
Bangladesh's ace all-rounder Shakib Al Hasan passed the fitness test with ease on 11 November ahead of a five-team T20 league starting later in November. He scored more than 13 in the Bangladesh Cricket Board (BCB) fitness test where the benchmark was set at 11. Shakib's one-year ban, for failing to report corrupt approaches by a bookmaker, ended recently when he came home in the first week of November. He sparked controversy by violating quarantine rules. [Online, Approximate Words: 85]
[Samakal is a popular Bengali daily with a circulation of around 200,000 copies. It is owned by the Times Media Limited and Ha-Meem Group, the latter being one of the largest textiles and garments conglomerates in Bangladesh. Samakal is generally critical of the ruling Bangladesh Awami League party and is known for its journalism on issues of corruption by ruling party politicians and workers. One of the bureau chiefs of the daily, Gautam Das, was murdered in 2005 for his reports exposing corruption in an infrastructure project.]
Source: Major news items from Bangladesh's Bangali-language press and online outlets in Bengali 11 Nov 20
BBC Mon SA1 SAsPol dm