By BBC Monitoring
US investor freed
Newspapers look at the release from house arrest of US investment banker Michael Calvey charged with fraud in Russia
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Anastasia Bashkatova article "Russia late with 'Calvey case'" says that the Russian Supreme Court has released Michael Calvey, the US investment banker charged in a major fraud case, from house arrest. The Russian authorities seem to be hoping to revive the country's investment image, but this year is still going to become the worst in the last 10 years as regards the inflow of direct foreign investment; pp 1-2.
Kommersant: Alexei Sokovnin et al. report "Vostok is thing of the past" says that the Supreme Court has released Michael Calvey, the founder of the Baring Vostok company, charged with major fraud, from house arrest, along with his fellow accused, imposing a night-time curfew instead. The defence is trying to persuade the court to drop the case altogether; p 1.
Vedomosti: Olga Kucherova article published in the regular column "Man of week: Michael Calvey" says that the Supreme Court's decision to release Michael Calvey from house arrest basically means the end of the criminal case against the investor and his partners. The prosecution lasted 21 months and resulted in Calvey's losing control over the Vostochny bank; p 6.
Russia's retaliation: France, Germany
Izvestia: Yekaterina Postnikova report "They respond" looks at Russia's decision to impose sanctions on German and French officials in retaliation for EU restrictions on Russian officials over the situation with Alexei Navalny. According to the Federation Council, Russia's sanctions are a logical move. Russia has also complained about the OPCW's role in the Navalny case. Moscow accused the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons of a biased approach to the incident and does not rule out that it will withdraw from the organization, article says.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Daria Garmonenko article "Navalny's HQs to undermine Putin's majority" says that Russian Foreign Minister has announced sanctions to be imposed on German and French officials as a response to similar EU restrictions placed on Russian officials following the poisoning of Kremlin critic Alexei Navalny. It is Navalny who will benefit from Lavrov's statement most. Meanwhile, Navalny's teams in Russian regions are going to focus on probes into officials' actions aiming to undermine Putin's majority; pp 1, 3.
Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Yuri Kogalov article "On elections and sanctions" provides highlights from Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov's interview with Russian and foreign mass media outlets in which he said that the official results of the US presidential election had not been finalised; p 6.
Putin's news conference
Komsomolskaya Pravda: Dmitry Smirnov report "What Putin's annual news conference will look like in 2020" quotes presidential spokesman Dmitry Peskov as saying that the news conference will be held in an "unusual format" and it will definitely take place in December. Peskov "has not given any details because the situation changes quickly," article says.
Vedomosti: Yelena Mukhametshina and Maria Istomina article "Putin online" says that President Putin's annual news conference will most likely be held on 17 December; p 3.
New Start treaty
Vedomosti: Svetlana Bocharova and Alexei Nikolsky article "Russia to wait" says that Russian Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov has said that Russia does not count on the extension of the New Start treaty as the US terms for the extension are unacceptable; p 2.
Naval base deal with Sudan
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Vladimir Mukhin article "Foothold for Russia's nuclear submarines being prepared in Red Sea" says that Moscow is preparing to sign an agreement with Sudan to set up a naval base on its territory which will be able to service nuclear-powered submarines in addition to other vessels; p 2.
Kommersant: Yelena Chernenko and Galina Dudina article "Red Sea seamen" focuses on Russia's plans to set up a naval base in Sudan and quotes experts as saying that Moscow has many reasons to expand its military presence in the region; p 5.
Moskovsky Komsomolets: Maxim Kislyakov article "Fleet to get African foothold" says that Russia has reached a preliminary agreement with Sudan to set up a naval base there for Russian warships; p 2.
Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Alexander Stepanov article "Russian flag in Africa" focuses on plans to set up a Russian naval base in Sudan and on its significance for the country's interests; p 4.
Aftermath of Nagorno-Karabakh truce
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Svetlana Gamova article "Protests over loss of Nagorno-Karabakh continue in Yerevan" says that the Armenian opposition keeps demanding resignation of Prime Minister Pashinyan over the deal on Nagorno-Karabakh; pp 1, 5.
Kommersant: Kirill Krivosheyev and Ayk Khalatyan article "Karabakh not to stand two" says that Moscow has signalled it will not let Turkish military observers patrol the Nagorno-Karabakh area as Ankara insists; p 5.
Kommersant: Gennady Sysoyev article "Lessons for Karabakh" says that by stopping the war between Armenia and Azerbaijan, Russia has prevented Nagorno-Karabakh from turning into the Republic of Serbian Krajina and this is what matters most; p 5.
Vedomosti: Gleb Mishutin article "Some 30 per cent of army could die" says that Armenian Prime Minister Pashinyan tried to explain his signing the agreement on truce in Nagorno-Karabakh by a very high chance of losing over 20,000 troops if the hostilities continued. Experts are split on whether Pashinyan will be able to stay in power; p 3.
Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Yuri Gavrilov article "Outsiders do not fly here" says that in his decree, President Putin has outlined regulations for Russia's peacekeeping mission in Nagorno-Karabakh, and provides details; p 2.
Covid-19: Health
Novaya Gazeta: Unattributed article "Cities surrendering to Covid-19" provides reports from Russian cities and towns hit by the Covid-19 epidemic most.
Vedomosti: Editorial by Alexei Sakhnin "Whose lives matter?" says that due to Covid-19, health has become the main front of social conflict the outcome of which will determine whose lives really matter; p 6.
Covid-19: Economic
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Olga Solovyeva article "Decline in tourism to leave three million Russians jobless" looks at a blow that the Covid-19 epidemic has dealt to tourism in Russia: between 1 and 3 million people may lose their jobs; pp 1, 4.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Yekaterina Trifonova article "Coronavirus amnesty working ineffectively" says that human rights activists say that the so-called "coronavirus amnesty" for foreigners is not very effective: some two thirds of labour migrants keep living and working in Russia illegally; p 3.
'Concentration camp'
RBC: Mikhail Kotlyar report "Schoolchildren from Karelia to be brought to simulated children's concentration camp on weekends" says that a "museum in the open air simulating the way of life of underage prisoners of Finnish concentration camps will open in Karelia in December". "Schoolchildren will stay in the camp for weekends," article adds.
Moscow police reform
Izvestia: Yelena Sidorenko report "Detachment, regroup" says that special police regiments will be set up at the Russian Interior Ministry directorate for Moscow. The reshuffle will affect top officers only. The layoffs will be carried out in the directorates for combat against economic crimes and drug trafficking. "According to analysts, the reinforcement of the police regiments is needed for the Interior Ministry to ensure order during mass events in the city on its own," article says.
Crypto currency
Vedomosti: Lyubov Mavrina article "Federal Tax Service to check digital wallets" says that a group of deputies have tabled with the parliament amendments that obligate residents of Russia to report on currency operations conducted with the help of digital wallets of foreign operators; p 1.
Moskovsky Komsomolets: Georgy Stepanov article "Real prison term for virtual money" says that the Finance Ministry has drafted amendments that envisage prison terms for undeclared crypto currencies worth over 45m roubles; p 1.
Domestic political
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Editorial "Single system of Putin's public authorities to substitute constitution" says that President Putin is going to form the State Council based on the amended constitution and the relevant law in December. The main purpose of the law seems to be to claim a place for the term "single system of public authorities" which will be defined later and will probably make the State Council one of the main actors of the Russian deep state; p 2.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Daria Garmonenko article "CPRF building left-patriotic front from below" says that the CPRF is preparing a forum of left-wing patriotic forces in February or March where it plans to announce the setting up of a coalition. The party then may create a coordinating council for the coalition and focus on the coordination of nomination of candidates in single-seat constituencies for the State Duma election; pp 1, 3.
Kommersant: Andrei Vinokurov and Ksenia Veretennikova article "Merger prescribed for A Just Russia" says that experts close to the presidential administration have pointed at a crisis in the A Just Russia party and suggested that it should merge with some party, for instance, the Party of Pensioners; p 3.
Kommersant: Nikita Korolyov article "Mayor's office to try not to lose face" says that the Moscow mayor's office has decided to step up security of data traffic from the city facial recognition system to the security agencies. Experts wonder why the city authorities have not done it earlier; p 1.
Domestic economic
Kommersant: Dmitry Butrin article "Gone with dilapidated" says that amendments outlining a new mechanism to resolve the problem of dilapidated housing have been tabled with the State Duma; p 1.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Anatoly Komrakov article "Russian government criticised for inefficiency of spending" says that a record breaking deficit of Russian budget has aggravated the problem of the inefficiency of budget spending; p 3.
Kommersant: Yulia Tishina et al. report "Business seeks IT support" says that the government has drafted proposals on a new set of support measures for IT industry; p 1.
Kommersant: Alexei Shapovalov article "GDP not like before" says that according to the Federal Statistics Service's preliminary estimates, Russia's GDP dropped by 3.6 per cent in July-September year-on-year, which is better than in April-June. Experts are concerned that GDP may resume its fall in the last three months of the year; p 2.
Kommersant: Oleg Dilimbetov and Angelina Galanina article "St Petersburg electoral commission loses head" says that chairman of the St Petersburg electoral commission Viktor Minenko has written a resignation letter upon pressure from Central Electoral Commission head Ella Pamfilova; p 3.
Vedomosti: Alexandra Koshkina article "Holidays to continue" says that the government has extended tax privileges for small and medium-sized businesses hit by the crisis caused by the Covid-19 epidemic until the year end. Experts note that more significant measures are needed; p 4.
Vedomosti: Yelena Vederina article "Year to wait for ingots" reports on the government's plans to cancel VAT on gold in early 2022; p 5.
Russia-Georgia
Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Kira Latukhina article "Shift in 'red zone'" reports on a meeting of the Russian president and the head of the Georgian breakaway republic of Abkhazia in Sochi; p 2.
US-related stories
Moskovsky Komsomolets: Dmitry Gulyayev article "US culmination" says that President Trump still has a chance of changing the outcomes of the US presidential election: the task is difficult, but not impossible; p 5.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Igor Subbotin article "Turkey indignant over Pompeo's impudence" says that the Turkish foreign minister has refused to meet his US counterpart Mike Pompeo as the latter chose to visit Istanbul instead of Ankara; p 2.
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Gennady Petrov article "Head of EU's diplomacy wants 'strategic autonomy' from US" says that High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy Josep Borrell has announced a significant change in relations with the US with a trend towards a more independent economic and political policy; p 6.
Asean summit
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Vladimir Skosyrev article "Largest free trade zone to be set up without Russia" reports on a virtual Asean summit where security in the South China Sea is to be discussed. The summit is to be followed by a conference of the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership which may result in the setting up of a trade association to account for some 30 per cent of global GDP; pp 1, 6.
Terrorism
Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Dmitry Rodionov article "Islamic State more like virus" says that the Islamic State group has claimed responsibility for the recent terrorist attack in Vienna, although the group was reportedly eliminated in both Syria and Iraq. Its ideas, however, thrive and even elimination of all its members will not put an end to it; p 3.
Sources: as listed. Inclusion of items in this list of significant reports from some of the day's main Russian newspapers does not necessarily mean that BBC Monitoring will file further on them
BBC Mon FS1 yg/ym