Stories being covered today by BBC Monitoring from South Asian broadcast, press and social media sources.
CORONAVIRUS
To read the best of our Covid-19 coverage please clickhere. To set up thematic feeds of our content on the pandemic, please see here for details.
South Asian media on Moderna vaccine announcement
Media outlets in South Asian countries largely gave factual coverage to the announcement of a new vaccine by US firm Moderna Inc, which said its vaccine was 94.5 per cent effective in preventing Covid-19.
Several Indian websites carried reports on their home pages. The LiveMint website noted "more positive news" for the second time this month. Highlighting the features of the new vaccine, a report by respected English-language paper The Indian Express said that it is "more stable than expected at temperatures that ordinary refrigerators can provide", which "opens the door for its early use in hard to reach places that might not be appropriate for Pfizer Inc’s vaccine which needs ultra-cold storage."
Most outlets in countries like Pakistan and Bangladesh carried agency copies describing the effectiveness, features and likely outcome of the vaccine.
Updates from South Asia
Pakistan has imposed restrictions on public rallies and gatherings across the country to contain the rapidly spreading second wave of infections. The announcement was made by Prime Minister Imran Khan in a televised address to the nation. The government has also banned indoor weddings. However, a much-awaited decision on closing of educational institutions has been delayed till next week.
Delhi Health Minister Satyendar Jain has dismissed reports of another lockdown in the Indian capital amid a continuing surge in infections. Over 600 people have died in the national capital in the past week in what is being described as a third peak of infections. An official of government policy think tank Niti Aayog described the situation as "unprecedented", adding that "it is likely to become worse", local media reported widely.
In Sri Lanka, Colombo Mayor Rosy Senanayake has called for a total lockdown of the city for at least three weeks, warning that not doing so could result in disaster, DailyFT reported. According to the report, a majority of recent deaths have been reported from Colombo.
OTHER DEVELOPMENTS
Indian state chief sworn in after election
Indian newspapers led with reports of Nitish Kumar being sworn in as the chief minister of Bihar state for the fourth time.
The event was attended by federal Home Minister Amit Shah and BJP chief JP Nadda. It comes after India's ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) and its regional ally Janata Dal United secured a majority in the election last week.
The state assembly election was the first major election to be held amid the pandemic. Leader of main opposition Rashtriya Janata Dal (RJD) Tejashwi Yadav did not attend the ceremony amid allegations of poll rigging. The BJP sees the election win as the people's mandate for Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Pakistan Islamist party calls off anti-France protest
Hardline Islamist party Tehreek-e-Labbaik Pakistan (TLP) has called off its protests against the publication of "blasphemous" cartoons in France last month after negotiations with the federal government yesterday, local news outlets reported.
Thousands of party supporters had blocked the main highway in Faizabad near capital Islamabad yesterday, demanding the expulsion of the French ambassador and end of diplomatic ties with the country, a day after violent clashes with the police.
A report on Samaa TV news website said the government reached a pact with party leader Khadim Hussain Rizvi and agreed to "expel" the French ambassador within two to three months with a consensus from the parliament. The government reportedly also said that it will not appoint its ambassador to France and release all arrested party workers.
However, there is no official confirmation of the agreement yet.
#FaizabadDharna and #TLPMarch were trending on Twitter in Pakistan with users commenting on the TLP's protest.
Social buzz
In Pakistan, hashtag "Muslim Pro" was among top trends on Twitter after a report said that the US military has been allegedly buying user location data from the app.
The app, which provides prayer timings and verses from the Koran, reportedly has a user base of over 90 million. It is allegedly one of the many apps monitored by the US government to keep track of individual's movements, it was reported.
Many expressed concern over the reports and urged users to uninstall the app.
Coming up
Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi will take part in the 12th BRICS summit to be hosted virtually by Russia today. The summit will also be attended by Chinese President Xi Jinping.
Navies of India, US, Japan and Australia will participate in the second phase of the Malabar exercise starting in the Northern Arabian Sea today. The first phase was conducted earlier this month in the Bay of Bengal.
Sri Lankan Prime Minister and Minister of Finance Mahinda Rajapaksa is due to present the new government's first budget in the parliament.
Source: BBC Monitoring
BBC Mon SA1 sf/vs/sa