By BBC Monitoring
French daily Le Monde published two articles on China's growing influence in the Indo-Pacific region, one linking it to France's involvement with other regional powers to contain it. There were no reports about French ties with Russia or Iran.
All French media dedicated most of their international news coverage to the US elections and the fighting in Nagorno-Karabakh. The Covid pandemic in France and elsewhere was also widely covered in France's three main dailies Le Monde, Le Figaro and Les Echos.
Indo-Pacific 'XXL alliance' to counter China
In two articles for Le Monde (14 Nov), Nathalie Guibert and Brice Pedroletti looked at the new emerging geostrategic landscape in the Indo-Pacific region and at France's greater involvement in it.
In the first article they set the scene of this new challenging geopolitical situation marked by greater links and closer military cooperation between the United States, India, Australia and Japan within the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue (Quad), which they label an "XXL alliance" to counter China.
This, Guibert and Pedroletti saed, results from concerns on their part as they are facing "China's territorial claims, an increase in its naval forces and a neo-colonialist policy." To respond, these countries "are readjusting their strategies, notably within Quad".
Their foreign ministers met in Tokyo on 6 October in the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, to discuss strategy to face the Chinese giant in the Indo-Pacific space.
Following the meeting US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo embarked on an extensive tour of Asia, starting with India, then Sri Lanka, the Maldives, Indonesia and Vietnam, to promote the defence of a "free and open Indo-Pacific".
Indo-Pacific is a "world's pivotal region, the current centre of gravity for maritime trade and growth," Guibert and Pedroletti say.
High level tactical manoeuvres, and wider themes, more countries joining
To highlight Quad countries' closer links, frigates and helicopters from the US, Australian, Japanese and Indian navies trained together in the Bay of Bengal as part of the "Malabar" exercises at the beginning of November. These high-level tactical manoeuvres, the first by the four Quad's naval forces after a test run in 2007, were marked by Australia's return, Guibert and Pedroletti write.
From 17 to 20 November, the US aircraft carrier Nimitz and the Indian aircraft carrier Vikramaditya, the Indian Navy's flagship, will be joined by Australian and Japanese ships in the western part of the Indian Ocean, off the coast of Goa.
The Indo-Pacific concept now encompasses multiple themes (technologies, environment, fishing resources, etc.) and other states.
France has joined in "as a neighbour", putting forward its overseas territories and their huge exclusive economic zone (EEZ) - the world's second largest.
The journalists quote Valerie Niquet, Director of the Foundation for Strategic Research Asia Centre, as saying that "the Indo-Pacific concept is not opposed to the emergence of China, but to the fact that, worryingly, it is emerging with a global power strategy marked by a very particular internal system, that of an ultra-authoritarian, nationalist and aggressive Communist Party. This concern is leading [the countries concerned] to have converging ideas and common denominators such as values, the freedom of navigation at sea and the rejection of force to change the status quo."
Guibert and Pedroletti recall Beijing's territorial claims ranging from a swathe of reefs to the island state of Taiwan as well as its "historic rights" over the entire South China Sea. China, they write, considers that its access to the ocean is hampered by groups of archipelagos owned by Japan, the Philippines, Taiwan, Borneo or the Mariana Islands. China wants to drive the Americans out of this region, where they have been since the end of the Second World War, they say.
Beijing is therefore trying to weaken, subvert and unravel American military alliances by imposing itself as a benevolent Asian Big Brother.
In the Indian Ocean, they write, China is advancing its pawns, through port concessions, but also through transport and telecommunications infrastructures - its "silk routes".
The Chinese navy capacity has continued to grow, to the point where it now lines up 350 ships, compared with 300 for the United States. This mass is worrying, not because it would be used for a deliberate aggression, but because it is likely to eventually exhaust Western countries whose naval forces numbers are limited. To compensate for this unfavourable asymmetry, they decided to tighten their network of alliances in the Indo-Pacific.
Beijing denounce naval drills
On 3 November, the Chinese Communist Party Global Times daily denounced the Malabar naval drills and attempts by the US to turn Quad founding states into an "Asian Nato", with the USA "likely to draw other regional countries into its military orbit in the foreseeable future".
However, the worsening American-Chinese confrontation swelled the ranks of a "non-aligned" camp, in which France, in particular, hopes to play a role.
Japan is at the origin of the Indo-Pacific concept. In a speech to the Indian Parliament on the "confluence of the two seas" in August 2007 then-Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, mentioned Indian and Japanese responsibility to "safeguard these seas of freedom". The same year, the very first Quad meeting was held following this initiative.
'Inclusive' French strategy in Indo-Pacific
In a second article, linked to the first one and published the same day, Guibert and Pedroletti looked at France's different approach.
Drawing on "the strength of its overseas departments and territories in this zone, France defends a multilateralist strategy vis-a-vis China, different from that advocated by the Quad," they write.
"In the Indo-Pacific region, the time is ripe for minilateralism, with flexible coalitions of small groups of countries, set up according to shared interests and areas of influence. This logic supports the Paris-Delhi-Canberra axis, which President Macron described during his visit to Australia in 2018 as 'absolutely key for the region and our common goals in the Indo-Pacific zone'.
Faced with China's "hegemonic" challenge, France calls for "a true new geostrategic order" and quickly abandoned the term "axis" seeking to appear "inclusive" now by cooperating with Malaysia, Vietnam, Japan, etc. Tokyo and Paris have thus signed technology transfer and logistical support agreements in 2016 and 2018. On 4 November, the French Foreign Ministry appointed an ambassador for the Indo-Pacific, Christophe Penot, a former ambassador to Australia. One of his missions will be to make the concept understood by the other ministries.
Paris bases its legitimacy on its overseas departments and territories, which bring together 1.6 million of its citizens and more than 90 per cent of the nine million square kilometres of its entire exclusive economic zone (EEZ), which includes Wallis and Futuna, New Caledonia and Polynesia in the Pacific; the Reunion island and Mayotte in the Indian Ocean.
Guibert and Pedroletti quote a senior French military official as saying that in this large area, "France can present itself as a neighbour and not as an outside power, which is particularly important for dialogue with partners", promoting a "well-balanced" position between Washington and Beijing.
France's scarce military resources make security cooperation essential
Faced with Beijing's conquering sovereignty, France lacks the means to protect its strategic supports. The French armed forces have only 7,000 personnel, few ships and even fewer planes in the region.
The French general staff regularly stresses that "everything that is not monitored is plundered," it is convinced that a war could be triggered by a fishing-related incident. A surveillance effort was launched from Papeete, in French Polynesia, in 2020.
Security cooperation has become vital, along one line: showing a presence, defending freedom of navigation in areas threatened by Beijing's "aggressive sanctuarisation".
India shares France's interest in the western Indian Ocean - not least because US regional military command coverage stops at the border with Pakistan.
The France-India-Australia convergence has also been helped by two major shipbuilding contracts: in 2016, Canberra committed to a 50-year partnership for the construction of 12 submarines by France's Naval Group and New Delhi signed a deal for the acquisition of 36 Rafale fighter jets in 2016. The three countries held their first "trilateral dialogue" on 9 September.
Increased number of military exercises
France is taking part in military exercises in the region. With the Quad's major partners, the objective is to be "able to work together, at a high level of military capability", say French strategists, to make this clear, France's staff exceptionally announced, on 10 November, that the nuclear attack submarine Emeraude would make a call in Perth, Australia.
Last year marked a turning point with the French aircraft carrier Charles-de-Gaulle taking part in Varuna, the largest French-Indian naval exercise to date in the Indian Ocean, before carrying out the first joint manoeuvres in the Bay of Bengal with the Japanese destroyer Izumo, alongside Australian and US navy ships. A French frigate sailed into the South China Sea, with a stopover in Ho Chi Minh City.
However, a major challenge for France's strategy is emerging Guibert and Pedroletti note: how to convince other European countries to share its security and military efforts?
Source: BBC Monitoring 15 Nov 20
BBC Mon EU1 mf/sa