The following is a roundup of the key narratives from Iran on the US election between 3 to 12 November:
With the US election called in favour of Joe Biden, Iranian media have been speculating even more than before about what the change in the US administration may mean for Iran.
The mood overall is the same as it has been in the past several weeks, with reformist outlets optimistic about the prospects of detente between Washington and Tehran while hardline outlets insist there is very little separating president-elect Biden and outgoing president Donald Trump.
Hardline media did not only dismiss prospects of rapprochement but also questioned the legitimacy of the US presidential election owing to Trump's unsubstantiated claims of fraud.
Both reformist and hardline outlets, however, are unanimous in that Biden's victory was a blow to the regional rivals of Tehran, including Israel and Saudi Arabia - supporters of Trump's "maximum pressure" policy against Iran.
Biden's election heralds 'change'
Reformist journalist Reza Raisi argued in the pro-reform daily Aftab-e Yazd that efforts by "Iranophobes around the world" to ensure more sanctions imposed on Tehran before Trump leaves office show that Biden's election "lays the foundation for change".
He argued that "they feel threatened" by the changes that Biden may bring to US policies.
The change that Raisi refers to is what reformists in Iran hope will lead to the cooling of tensions between Tehran and Washington, which eventually result in the lifting of US sanctions
In an op-ed for the pro-reform daily E'temad, Ruhollah Suri said Biden will likely "adopt a multidimensional outlook" toward Iran, which he argued would deprive hardliners in the Islamic Republic of the opportunity to successfully promote their anti-negotiation policy.
He also argued that failure to capitalise on Biden's election could cost Iran, as Washington's allies may be more willing to get on board with whatever Biden's Iran policy might be.
The optimism coming from reformists is not shared by every member of the pro-reform camp.
Journalist Ahmad Zeidabadi wrote on Instagram that there was a possibility that those in Iran who oppose any sort of interaction with the US may"take measures in the region, especially in the Persian Gulf" to put the US at odds with Iran and "neutralise" any prospect of talks behind the scene.
'Crushing water in mortar'
Hardline media have made no secret of their opposition to the prospect of talks with the US.
Hossein Shariatmadari, the managing director of the hardline daily Keyhan, mocked the supporters of detente with America and compared their efforts to get Iran and the US talking to "crushing water in a mortar", i.e. beating the air.
"There will be no talks with America," Shariatmadari declared in his op-ed for Keyhan, before listing four conditions that could potentially pave the way for negotiations: lifting of sanctions, unfreezing Iran's assets abroad, compensating Iran for damages caused by the sanctions, and "retribution" against Trump for the killing of Iranian general Qasem Soleimani.
Shariatmadari said the only difference between Trump and Biden was that the former had ordered the assassination of Soleimani. Conservative pundit Mohammad Hassan Qadiri Abiyaneh agreed, telling Fars news agency that when it comes to Iran, "both Democrats and Republicans want poverty and misfortune to befall" the Iranian nation.
He argued that both Trump and Biden wanted a "pushover government" in Iran and that is why "they prefer to have reformists win" in next year's presidential election.
Source: BBC Monitoring 12 Nov 20
BBC Mon ME1 ksh/at