The following is a BBCM selection of major news items from select Indian Bengali-language press and online media outlets on 17 November 2020.
Anandabazar Patrika
Federal agency seeks BJP politician's financial records
The federal law enforcement agency, Enforcement Directorate (ED), has issued a notice to Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) politician Mukul Roy and his wife seeking details of their wealth and bank accounts. The ED also asked Roy to meet the officials in another federal investigative agency, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI). [Online, Approximate Words: 350]
National leadership of BJP becomes active in West Bengal
The national leadership of the BJP is becoming active in West Bengal ahead of the state assembly elections in 2021. The national leaders of the party have held three meetings in West Bengal over a span of 13 days to discuss the election strategy. The social media cell of the party is also becoming active in West Bengal. [Online, Approximate Words: 300]
West Bengal's Covid-19 death toll increases by 53
West Bengal health department on 16 November said 53 Covid-19 patients had died in the past 24 hours [15 to 16 November]. The state health department said 3,012 positive Covid-19 cases were recorded over the same period of time, taking the total number of cases to 434,563. [The total number of deaths due to Covid-19 in West Bengal is 7,714.] [Online, Approximate Words: 200]
[Anandabazar Patrika is the largest-circulated Bengali-language daily in India and is known to enjoy readers' respect. The daily is run by the ABP Group, a media conglomerate that also owns English-language daily The Telegraph and several television news channels, including ABP News in Hindi.]
thewall.in
Communist party politician likely to join BJP
Rinku Naskar, a politician with the Communist Party of India-Marxist (CPI-M), is likely to join the state unit of the BJP. On being asked, how could she join the right-wing BJP from the left-wing CPI-M, Naskar said that there is nothing called ideology these days. Naskar said that if Congress can tie up with Left parties, then anything is possible. [Online, Approximate Words: 200]
Trinamool Congress politician blames advisor for downfall
Trinamool Congress politician Niamot Sheikh on 16 November said that the party's political advisor Prashant Kishor is to be blamed for its downfall. Sheikh also said, "Who is Prashant Kishor? Is he party's leader? If he is not a political leader, then why should we listen to him?" [Poll strategist Kishor was appointed by Trinamool Congress party chief and Chief Minister of West Bengal Mamata Banerjee as advisor in 2019]. [Online, Approximate Words: 250]
Arrested men reveal new methods of cyber crime
Police say they have arrested some men who are allegedly engaged in cyber-crime, and they have revealed new methods of withdrawing money from bank accounts without getting access to the one-time-password (OTP) sent to the customer. The criminals are asking random people to use eSIM [embedded-SIM]. Once they use the eSIM, the criminals are able to withdraw money from bank accounts which are linked with the mobile phone. [Online, Approximate Words: 260]
[Online publication thewall.in is a popular and independent Bengali-language news website. It is generally observed to offer balanced reportage.]
Bartaman
Containment zones in West Bengal reduced by 1,000
The number of Covid-19 containment zones in West Bengal has been reduced from 3,312 on 29 October to 2,335 on 13 November. Despite the festival period in the state, the number of Covid-19 cases is on the decrease and therefore the number of containment zones has gone down too. [Online, Approximate Words: 350]
Editorial lauds people, government for controlling Covid-19
"Several weeks have passed since Durga Puja [autumn festival during which Hindu deity Durga is worshipped], but the rate of new [Covid-19] infections has not increased here. This success belongs to the government of [West] Bengal as well as to the people here. Even the critics who are busy criticising the [West] Bengal government may be happy with the government's role in preventing the coronavirus infection. Even the [Prime Minister Narendra] Modi government at the federal level has expressed satisfaction over the initiative of several states, including West Bengal, to curb the coronavirus infection... However, it is difficult to say what would have happened if the ban on firecrackers had not been imposed. Although a handful of people have been ignorant of the effect of bursting firecrackers, most of them have shown a sense of responsibility by refraining from bursting firecrackers. Thanks to them... The state administration has taken up the challenge of dealing with coronavirus along with the people of the state. If you can show a little more patience, a little more restraint, Bengal will be able to win coronavirus." [Online, Approximate Words: 700]
[Bartaman is the second-largest Bengali-language daily in India. The newspaper focuses mainly on West Bengal's politics and rural problems. It is usually supportive of the West Bengal-based political party All India Trinamool Congress.]
Ei Samay
State BJP chief says will transform West Bengal into Gujarat
The state unit chief of BJP in West Bengal, Dilip Ghosh, on 16 November said that people in the state go to other states in search of work because there is no development [in West Bengal] and therefore the party will transform the state into [the western Indian state of] Gujarat. [Online, Approximate Words: 300]
Tribal people to build new statue of leader in Bankura
The tribal people in Bankura district will build a statue of their tribal leader, Birsa Munda, after Indian Minister of Home Affairs Amit Shah garlanded the statue of a random tribal hunter by claiming it to be the statue of Munda on 5 November. BJP politicians said it was the statue of Munda and rival Trinamool Congress party was politicising the matter. [The political parties are trying to appease the tribal population in West Bengal ahead of the assembly elections in 2021.] [Online, Approximate Words: 280]
[Ei Samay is a Bengali daily published by the Bennett, Coleman and Company Limited, commonly known as The Times Group, that runs a range of media outlets, including India's largest English-language daily The Times of India.]
Source: major news items published in India's Bengali-language press and online outlets in Bengali 17 Nov 20
BBC Mon SA1 SAsPol dm