By BBC Monitoring

The future of temporary residence permit programme and prospects for the permanent deployment of US troops in the Baltics were among the main topics covered by Latvian newspapers and websites on 28-29 July 2020.

Draft law on historical territories

The editor-in-chief of the centrist daily Neatkariga, Juris Paiders, critically evaluates the necessity and goals of the draft law on Latvian historical territories initiated and presented to media by President Egils Levits. Paiders expresses doubts that Latvian identity will grow after Latvia takes over the administrative-territorial division of Germany, calling Latvia's cultural and historical regions "lands" and disagrees that the new bill will strengthen democracy. Paiders says that the components of the Latvian state are defined by the constitution: "The territory of the state of Latvia within the borders specified in international agreements consists of Vidzeme, Latgale, Kurzeme, and Zemgale" and emphasises that this article can be amended only by referendum. (Neatkariga, 29 July)

Latvia's Russian community

Journalist Garry Gailit in his opinion piece for the IMHOClub portal focuses on the structure of Latvia's Russian-speaking society which is "skilfully divided into warring units". Gailit notes that "it is high time to change the situation when the Harmony party and the Russian Union, set by someone on each other, in the reciprocal barking, in effect serve the interests of the right-wing National Alliance." The journalist says the Harmony party's self-criticism about the decade under its former leader Nils Usakovs was beneficial for the right wing and the disagreements between Harmony and the Russian Union have led to weak opposition to the closure of Russian schools. Gailit suggests creating a united block of all parties which roads the interests of Latvia's Russian population for the next general election. (IMHOClub, 29 July)

Temporary residence permits

The programme of temporary residence permits is being curtailed In Latvia, since most recipients of residence permits are immigrants from countries of the former USSR, to a greater extent - Russians, and the right-wing National Alliance believes that their massive influx increases the likelihood of a "threat from the East," Baltnews portal says. Amendments to the law, which would permit the cancelling of a residence permit or denying a visa to a resident of the third country in case of violation of the mandatory self-isolation regime due to Covid-19, have become only an excuse to finally kill the once-promising programme, the portal notes. Baltnews cites MP Janis Adamsons of the Harmony who negatively assessed the elimination of the programme, noting that politicians have been causing enormous economic damage to the country, chasing fictitious "Kremlin agents". (lv.Baltnews.com, 28 July)

US troops in Baltic states

Nato is unlikely to violate the Russia-Nato Founding Act in connection with the withdrawal of a part of the military contingent from Germany, and the USA will not permanently deploy its military contingent in the Baltic states, Latvian ambassador to Russia Maris Riekstins was quoted by the Baltnews portal as saying. For his part, professor at the Diplomatic Academy of the Russian Foreign Ministry Vladimir Vinokurov stressed in an interview with Baltnews that the Americans would not agree to the permanent deployment of their contingent in the Baltic states, since this would be a tough challenge to Russia's national security. According to him, US President Donald Trump decided to redeploy the military from Germany to Poland only to get rid of the importunity of Polish President Andrzej Duda. (lv.Baltnews.com, 28 July)

Belarusian election

The popular TVNet news portal carries an interview with Svyatlana Tsikhanowskaya, the main opponent of Alyaksandr Lukashenka (Alexander Lukashenko) in the Belarusian presidential election. The interview in cooperation with Meduza, a Riga-based online newspaper and news aggregator in the Russian language, highlights that the current election period in Belarus is called the "dirtiest" in the country's history - two opposition candidates are in prison, one has been forced to leave the country, others have been refused registration by the election commission. The opposition is gathering around Tsikhanowskaya, who is running for her arrested husband and says she wants good neighbourly relations with Russia but does not want a Union State. (TVNet, 29 July)

Pompeo' s speech

An editorial headlined "Cold War 2.0" of the centrist daily Diena comments on US State Secretary Mike Pompeo's speech, the latest in the series of Trump administration broadsides against China. One of the speech's main objectives appears to be a call-to-arms, like Churchill at Fulton, notes Diena, which concludes that it adds additional friction in the US-China relationship. According to the editorial, the grounds for Beijing's economic expansion, complained of by Pompeo, was laid by the USA itself, paying with China's economic development for the victory in the first Cold War with the USSR, when the need to permanently separate China from the USSR played a key role. The accusations against the Chinese Communists are a powerful argument ahead of the US presidential election, Diena concludes. (Diena, 29 July)

Source: BBC Monitoring 29 Jul 20

BBC Mon EU1 aj/eo