By BBC Monitoring

The second election broadcasts of presidential candidates and the latest developments in the campaign were among the main stories covered by Belarusian newspapers and news websites on 28-29 July.

Election broadcasts

When the current authorities leave, "there will be no Maidan [street protests], there will be jubilation", presidential candidate Svyatlana Tsikhanowskaya said in her second election broadcast on TV, according to the Salidarnasts website. She promised to restore justice, put Belarusians' hopes into reality and make better use of the state budget. (Salidarnasts, 28 July)

In his election broadcast, presidential candidate Andrey Dzmitryyew said that "even in 1994 the people in Belarus did not want a new president as much as they do now", the Komsomolskaya Pravda v Belarusi reports. According to the paper, his main message was that all groups of the population, including budget-paid teachers and doctors, long for a change of the head of state. (Komsomolskaya Pravda v Belarusi, 28 July)

Candidate Hanna Kanapatskaya, for her part, warned Belarusians against putting any trust in a person "who promises the bright future will come the next day after his election as president", Komsomolskaya Pravda v Belarusi says. She insists that she is not a "technical candidate" and that Belarusians need her "as the peaceful president-reformer, who cares about each one of you, the president who speaks for consolidation, not split". (Komsomolskaya Pravda v Belarusi, 28 July)

Instead of getting busy with developing the economy, the authorities only care about their own well-being, candidate Syarhey Cherachen said in his election broadcast, as quoted by the Belorusskiye Novosti website. "The authorities are dividing us into 'their own' and 'aliens'," he said, criticising the government approach to private businesses. (Belorusskiye Novosti, 28 July)

State-ordered poll

A phone survey conducted by the Ecoom think-tank at the request of the Second National TV Channel has found that 89.5 per cent of Belarusian voters plan to go to the polls, the Tut.by news website reports. Some 72.3 per cent intend to vote for the incumbent president, 7.5 per cent for Tsikhanowskaya, 0.1 per cent for Kanapatskaya. Some 10.9 per cent did not make up their mind. (Tut.by, 28 July)

Expert views

In an article for the Belorusskiye Novosti website, pundit Alyaksandr Klaskowski says the authorities are upping the ante by showing the footage of internal troops training to disperse protesters. In his opinion, the authorities will seek to ensure Lukashenka's victory in the first round, hence the highly optimistic figures of his public support published by the Ecoom pollster. He commends Tsikhanowskaya's application to address parliament on 3 August as a "strong move". (Belorusskiye Novosti, 28 July)

According to pundit Valeryy Karbalevich, the only candidate with a full-fledged campaign is Svyatlana Tsikhanowskaya whose rallies, together with Mariya Kalesnikava and Veranika Tsapkala, "gather thousands, something Belarus has not seen for a long time". In an article for the Svobodnyye Novosti Plyus website, he says that now that the authorities are seeing her as a threat, government-controlled media have launched a campaign to discredit her. He also expects political resistance to escalate close to election day (Svobodnyye Novosti Plyus, 29 July)

Military angle

The Vo Slavu Rodiny (Belorusskaya Voyennaya Gazeta) army newspaper publishes yet another article about "'Maidan' destabilisation techniques". In particular, it insists that Black Lives Matter protests are aimed "against not just President Donald Trump but the foundation of the US and entire Western culture identity". The article alleges that attempts are being made to use destabilisation techniques in Belarus "to try and send the country into chaos". (Vo Slavu Rodiny, 28 July)

There are no signs of protest radicalisation towards violent confrontation, therefore currently the authorities have no reason for involving the army in political matters, according to the Belarus Security Blog website. "Given the politicisation of society and the regime's loss of the ability to dictate the political agenda, statements about the possibility of using the army for political purposes within the country negatively affect the perception of the army by society," it says. (Belarus Security Blog, 28 July)

Musician-politician

The Narodnaya Volya website interviews Mariya Kalesnikava, a representative of failed presidential hopeful Viktar Babaryka in candidate Svyatlana Tsikhanowskaya's HQ, about her professional music background, hobbies and views about Belarus. She says she is not afraid for her life but that "we will not pay maximum effort to build a new country [...] because no life will otherwise remain in Belarus for the next 25 years". Belarusians are an "absolutely European nation" by their spirit, she adds. (Narodnaya Volya, 28 July)

Coronavirus

Narodnaya Volya slyly wonders how many people the Belarusian president has infected with the coronavirus which he says he has overcome "on his feet". "As we know, from the very beginning of the pandemic, Alyaksandr Lukashenka [Alexander Lukashenko] has not succumbed to the 'coronapsychosis': he did not wear a mask, did not observe social distance, did not hold online meetings and, on the contrary, ignored the precautions recommended by doctors in every possible way," the website says. (Narodnaya Volya, 28 July)

Source: BBC Monitoring 29 Jul 20

BBC Mon KVU mk/dz
