At least 36 loyalists of ISIS terrorist group were killed by Afghan Special Forces in vicinity of
eastern Nangarhar province last night. According to another report, Afghan security forces by discovering
and confiscating 4 round of different type of mines succeeded to prevent from a series of blast incidents in
Nangarhar province.

Two militants of Taliban insurgent group have been killed after an improvised explosive device
(IED) they were planting along a road detonated prematurely. Taliban militants and Islamic State fighters
have been using IEDs to make roadside bombs and landmines for targeting security forces.

Five civilians lost their lives and nine others sustained injuries as a roadside bombing launched
by militants struck a vehicle in Haska Mina district of eastern Afghanistan's Nangarhar province. A mine
planted by militants on a road in Haska Mina district struck a civilian vehicle.

At least one civilian was killed and four others injured as a roadside bomb struck their car
outside Pul-e-Khumri, the capital of northern Baghlan province. A mine planted by militants struck a car in
Khawja Alwan area outside provincial capital Pul-e-Khumri city at around noon today, killing one civilian on
the spot and wounding four others.

A suicide bomb attack at a voter registration centre in the Afghan capital Kabul has killed at
least 57 people. A further 119 people were injured. The Islamic State group (IS) said it had carried out the
attack.

An anti-Taliban politician, together with three policemen has been killed in a bomb attack in
the country's northern province of Faryab. Ghulam Farooq Qate and three Afghan Local Police (ALP)
personnel were killed following an improvised explosive device (IED) attack in village Sheerank, on
outskirts of provincial capital Faryab city. The incident occurred when Qate's vehicle touched off the IED
and three ALP policemen were also wounded, the spokesman added.

The Taliban have destroyed three telephone towers in central Logar province, depriving
thousands of people of telecom services. The Taliban last week ordered mobile phone operators to switch
off their networks from five in the afternoon until seven in the morning, saying foreign troops in
Afghanistan used mobile phones to track the militants.

Ghulam Farooq, a former commander of Hezb-i-Jamiat Islami Afghanistan, has been killed in a
roadside bombing in northwestern Faryab province.

Twin explosions in the center of the Afghan capital of Kabul wounded at least three people.
According to security personnel near the site of the explosion, close to a large mosque in the city center,
an unknown attacker threw a hand grenade at a police checkpoint before escaping on foot. However the
public health ministry said the explosion was caused by two magnetic bombs. Police also said a domestic
gas bottle had blown up.

At least six Taliban militants were killed after Afghan Special Operations Forces waged a raid in
eastern province of Nangarhar overnight. No security force member was hurt and a AK-47 gun, five gun's
magazines, a telecommunication radio, together with ammunition and explosives, were found.

Two policemen were killed and as many wounded when a roadside bomb tore through their
vehicle in Khanabad district of northern Kunduz province.

Six Taliban militants, including a bomb making expert, were killed in a nighttime operation by
intelligence officials in the Khogyani district of eastern Nangarhar province. The security forces also
confiscated two Kalashnikovs, one walkie-talkie and five magazines besides destroying some explosives.

Taliban fighters seized a district centre in northern Afghanistan on Saturday, while a bomb at
an army base in the southern province of Helmand killed at least five people. The latest violence came as
insurgents pushed ahead with a spring offensive.

At least one civilian was killed and four soldiers were wounded in a car bomb in the Nad Ali
district of Helmand province. A suicide bomber detonated a vehicle full of explosives.

At least six people, including a child, were injured in a bomb attack near a voter registration
center in Jalalabad, capital of eastern Afghan province of Nangarhar. A poll registration center was set up
inside the mosque for locals to visit the site and receive voting card. The blast also damaged several
nearby buildings. No group has claimed responsibility for the incident yet