Deputies are investigating after an explosive was thrown from a car in a neighborhood. The
explosive detonated in the grass. Bomb Squad was on scene investigated what appeared to be a pipe
bomb. No one was injured and no property was damaged in the explosion.

A bomb threat was called in to Gold’s Gym in Ogden Tuesday evening, prompting an
evacuation of the building as police cleared the area. The threat was ambiguous. Authorities determined
the threat was unsubstantiated, and no bomb or device was found during the searches.

The bomb squad is reportedly on the scene after a device was found near the Franconia
Township police station. A long cylindrical object was discovered in a patch of grass just outside of the
station .

A suspicious package that was found near Waynesville has been determined to be nonhazardous. Units were first dispatched at about noon to check a package that might have fallen out of a
small airplane.

Palm Springs Police have determined that a suspicious package found in front of the USO at
the Palm Springs International Airport was an irrigation water timer in a plastic container with wires that
left by a worker.

A suspicious, pipe-like device found Wednesday afternoon inside a Naperville bank proved to
be harmless. A bomb squad team took the device outdoors and placed it inside a special, fortified box
before detonating it. The device, upon further examination, was determined not to be a danger.

3:22:00 AM A Schuylkill County high school was placed on lockdown Wednesday after a
threatening note was discovered. A search of the building by law enforcement and school officials was
conducted, the notification said, and nothing was found.

School officials at Cortland High School were put on alert Thursday morning after police were
called to the school to investigate rumors of a bomb threat that surfaced on social media. Rumors that
were circulating on social media regarding a high school student who "may have threatened to blow up
the school. School officials coordinated with law enforcement to investigate and conclude that there was
no credible threat.

A call of a reported suspicious device near a port-a-potty. Investigators say it was reported to
them by septic tank cleaning service. Authorities have notified schools to keep buses away from area.
Owensboro Police's bomb squad was called in to diffuse it, while the area was blocked off for several
hours. It took officers two tries to detonate it remotely.

A Springfield call center was shut for nearly four hours Thursday after a suspicious device was
discovered near the building’s natural gas line. The device appeared to be two sticks of dynamite with a
cellphone attached, but it was later determined to be two road flares with a digital recording device
attached — disguised to look like an explosive. Police bomb squad used two robots to determine the
device was a hoax.

According to the regional school superintendent, a teacher found a note saying a bomb would
go off at 11 a.m. Administrators evacuated the building and Williamson County Sheriff's deputies conducted a search. At last check investigators were still trying to determine who left the note.
Authorities declared the incidet like false alarm.

Authorities have identified the person of interest in the explosive device placed at Asheville
Regional Airport on Friday. He has been identified as Michael Christopher Estes, 46. Estes is described as a
white male with brown hair and brown eyes. The Asheville Police Department's Hazardous Device Team
responded to reports of a suspicious package at the Asheville Regional Airport. The package was located
by the Asheville Regional Airport Police Department. The explosive device was rendered safe by the
Hazardous Device Team and removed from the Asheville Regional Airport.

The Albion Police Department was dispatched to the Albion High School for a threat made by a
student against the School. The Albion Police Department working in conjunction with School Officials
determined that the Threat made against the school was false and that there was no danger to Students.

The Indiana State Police bomb squad was called out after someone reported a suspicious
device inside an abandoned home near Park Tudor School. Indiana State Police explosives unit was called
to assist at the scene. Specialists have collected the device so they can take it to their bunker for analysis.
It is unclear at this time what the device was or if anything was set off inside the home.

The Presbyterian Hospital on Central reopened after being temporarily on lock down Sunday
morning when a suspicious device was found. After finding the device, and employee moved it outside
where the bomb squad then rendered the device safe