Syria’s opposition-held city of Azaz was rocked by a car bomb on Thursday that left at least 10
people injured, according to local sources. Anadolu Agency correspondents based in the area said a bombladen vehicle had exploded near the city’s district council building, injuring a number of bystanders.

The army forces discovered the factory in the town of Zamalka in Eastern Ghouta of Damascus
on Thursday in which Faylaq al-Rahman militants manufactured different types of bombs and ammunition.
Meantime, the Syrian army units found and seized a bomb-laden car in a region between the towns of
Zmalka and Hazeh in Eastern Ghouta.

The Syrian Army troops continued mop-up operation in Zmelka region in Eastern Ghouta,
discovering an arms depot of the terrorists with a large volume of Saudi-made explosives and equipment.
The sources further said that a large number of bombs, missiles and mortar shells were in the depots.
They went on to say that the army men found a large volume of Saudi-made explosives and equipment,
including C4, equipment for injecting chlorine to mortar shells and missiles to increase their blast power,
in one of the depots.

An explosion rocked an area in northern Syria Saturday near a base where pro-regime Iranian
fighters and allied Shiite militias have been stationed. The origin of the blast was not immediately clear
and could have been caused by an air strike or an incident at an ammunition depot.

The Russian military police and officers from the Russian Center for Syrian reconciliation have
seized 250 mines, 25 kilograms of TNT and 1.5 tons of other explosives from caches that belonged to the
militants from the Jaish al-Islam illegal armed group.

he Syrian Army troops found a workshop in Eastern Ghouta used by the terrorists for
producing arms, bombs and chemical weapons. The army men continued mop-up operation in Aftaris
region in Eastern Ghouta and discovered a large workshop with an advanced laboratory for making
chemical weapons in an area that was once terrorists' positions. A large volume of poisonous and chemical
materials, including chlorine and safety uniforms were discovered in the workshop.

Islamic State media showing the use of a massive vehicle bomb by ISIS affiliate faction Jaysh
Khalid ibn al-Walid against rival militant groups in southwestern Daraa province. The bombing is linked to
an offensive launched by the terrorist affiliate militia against Free Syrian Army fighters near the Yarmouk
Basin area. Islamic State media claims the casualty count inflicted on its enemy to be 35 dead and fortytwo wounded.

Syrian troops carrying out searches of militants at the settlement of Ar-Ruheiba in the Eastern
Qalamoun Mountains in Rif Dimashq Governate have seized suicide belts and ammunition which jihadists
tried to take with them during their withdrawal, the Syran Arab News Agency reports.

Syrian rebels on Wednesday dismantled seven improvised explosive devices planted by proregime militants in the northern countryside of Daraa province. The resistance factions were able to
dismantle seven explosive devices planted on the Kafr Shams-Akraba road, adding that the IEDs contained laser devices and wireless transmitters to be detonated remotely. They took the shape of stones to suit
the geographical nature of the region.

A motorcycle bomb has been detonated at marketplace in the Syrian border town of AlGhandorah in northern Aleppo province. The motorcycle was parked on location for some time prior to
exploding. The attack appears to been carried out from a distance either with a timer or remote, rather
than involving suicide.

Fighting between Syrian troops and Islamic State group fighters in southern neighborhoods of
the capital Damascus left dozens of people dead or wounded. The Britain-based Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights said government bombardment killed 17 people, including seven children and two women
in the Palestinian refugee camp of Yarmouk mostly controlled by IS.