A massive bomb attack in a busy area of the Somali capital Mogadishu has killed at least 30
people. Dozens more were wounded when a lorry packed with explosives detonated near the entrance of
a hotel. Police say two people were killed in a second bomb attack in the Madina district of the city.
It is not clear who staged the attacks. Mogadishu is a regular target for the al-Qaeda linked al-Shabab
group,.

Security officials in Somalia say a key member of the cell that launched a devastating attack
on Mogadishu has told them that al-Shabaab, a violent Islamist group in Somalia, was responsible for the
blast. The death toll from the bombing, which involved a truck packed with explosives, reached 320 late
on Monday morning. Hundreds more were injured in one of the most lethal terrorist acts anywhere in the
world for many years. Security official said explosives had been hidden under rice, sugar and other goods
on the truck, which passed though a government-controlled checkpoint at Sinka Dheer, about four miles
(7km) outside Mogadishu. Suspicious officers stopped the vehicle and briefly detained its driver. It is
understood a local businessman and tribal leader vouched for the truck.

A car bomb exploded on the outskirts of the Somali capital Mogadishu on Friday killing the
driver. The car detonated in the village of Markaz just over 20 kilometres (12 miles) northwest of
Mogadishu.

At least there were six people killed and several wounded in a road side bomb agaisnt a
minibus in Somalia.While the bus was travelling on the road hit against an IED and blew up afecting to a
passenger.

At least six civilian were killed, and severeal wounded after a roadside bomb ripped throough
a minibus carrying passengers in southern Somalia. No group has clamied credit for the attack.

At least six people were killed on Sunday when a minibus hit a landmine in Somalia's Middle
Shabelle region. A resident in the area told Xinhua that the minibus carrying vegetables was from Afgoye
town in lower Shabelle region and was heading to Bal'ad town when it hid the roadside bomb. Four
women, a driver and the conductor who were traveling on the minibus were killed in the landmine
explosion.

Six Somali civilians were killed in a landmine explosion on Sunday, just days after the
country’s deadliest attack killed hundreds. Officials in Lower Shabelle region confirmed to VOA Somali that
two women and four men died after an improvised explosive device hit a minibus at Daniga village about
35 kilometers north of Mogadishu.

A powerful explosion took place outside a police station in Bosaso. The blast resulted from an
explosives laden wheelbarrow, pushing by the suspected militant trying who was a would be suicede
bomber targeting the Police HQ. The explosion caused a death. No gropup claimed responsability for the
foiled bomb attack.

At least one person was confirmed dead in a premature explosion in a house in Mogadishu's
Kaaraan district . Residents said a person believed to be the bomber died in the blast, while two others a
man and his wife were reported to have sustained severe injuries in the incident.

At least ten people were killed and more than 16 others injured on Wednesday when a
landmine blast hit the Africa Union peacekeeping mission (AMISOM) convoy south of Somalia's
Mogadishu.

Three people died in Somalia on Wednesday in different attacks, one of which targeted a
patrol of peacekeepers near , Mogadishu. A roadside bomb killed one African Union peacekeeper and
wounded another as they patrolled Arbis, a village about 23 kilometers southwest of Mogadishu.

At least 25 people have been killed and another 30 are injured when two car bombs exploded
and gunmen stormed a hotel in the Somali capital of Mogadishu. Following the blasts on Saturday,
gunmen laid siege to the Nasa-Hablood hotel. Among the 25 confirmed dead in the initial bomb blasts
were Abdinasir Mohamed Garane, a former deputy minister of livestock, and a senior police
commissioner.

Attackers lobbed explosive devices at the residences of two opposition lawmakers in assaults
that the legislators . No one was hurt in the blasts.

Ugandan MP Robert Kyagulanyi is one of the latest opposition politicians who had his windows
smashed on Tuesday morning. He points to the damage caused by explosions from what are believed to
be hand grenades that went off deep in the night.