The Afghan police forces have thwarted a plot by the anti-government armed militants to
detonate explosives in a roundabout in Kabul city. The Kabul Police Commandment officials are saying that
the police forces discovered and defused the explosives planted in Arzan Qeemat roundabout in the
vicinity of the 12th police district of the city.

One driver and two archaeologists were wounded and one other one was killed. The explosion
happened at about 7am local time when the archaeologists were on their way to Logar province. So far no
group including the Taliban has claimed responsibility for the attack.

Three children were killed in a landmine explosion in eastern Afghanistan’s Nangarhar province.
The incident occurred in Shirullah Qala village of Haska Mina district on Sunday afternoon, the statement
said, blaming the Islamic State (IS) militant group for planting the landmine on the dusty road. The victims
aged between 12 and 13, according to the statement.

Taliban planned to plant a roadside mine. In the meantime, General Command of Police Special
Units (GCPSU) launched an operation in Maidan Shahr city capital of Wardak province. As a result, General
Command of Police Special Units arrested a senior member of armed Taliban who was involved in
destructive and terrorist activities. GCPSU seized two roadside bombs and one rocket during operations as
well.

At least five people were killed and several others injured after a suicide bombing ripped
through un university where top Afghan religious scholars were having a meeting in western part of Kabul
city. The blast occurred roughly at 11:30 a.m. at the gate of Kabul Poly Technique University where a
religious scholars' meeting was held. The initial investigation found five people, including the assailant,
were killed, and several others wounded.

Several people have been killed in a suicide attack targeting Muslim scholars who had gathered
in a tent near the Polytechnic University in Afghanistan's Kabul. at least seven people have been killed and
nine others wounded in Monday's attack. He had earlier reported the death toll was Tweelve people.
Police officials also confirmed there were seven deaths.

A motorcycle suicide bomber killed fourteen people near a gathering of Muslim clerics in the
Afghan capital on Monday after they had issued a fatwa against suicide bombings. The bomb exploded at
the entrance to a giant tent, near residential buildings in the west of Kabul, after most the clerics had left.
Women living nearby were crying as they gathered with their families. The bomb killed seven clerics, four
security officers and three people whose identities were unknown.

One police officer has been killed and two others wounded following a heavy explosion in
Afghanistan's southern Kandahar province. The blast happened late Monday night at Police District 12 of
provincial capital Kandahar city, resulting in the casualties, spokesman Daud Ahmadi told Xinhua. One
police vehicle was also damaged in the blast. No armed group has so far claimed responsibility for the
attack.

A 10-year-old child was killed and seven people wounded in a blast in Jalalabad city, capital of
Afghanistan's eastern province of Nangarhar. The explosion occurred roughly at 6:00 a.m. local time in
front of a small shop in Police District 2 of the city when an improvised explosive device (IED) exploded,
the statement added. Those among the injured were four children and the shop owner. Police have
shifted the victims to a main regional hospital in the city.

The insurgents were targeted in Khas district, Urozgan province and suburb of Trenkot city while
organizing a series of blasts. According to another report, two weapons caches of Taliban were discovered
in Urozgan province. The caches were kept in two hideouts of Taliban in Charcheno district and suburb of
Trenkoit city.

Four civilians were wounded due to magnetic mine blast in Pol-e-Khomri city capital of Baghlan
province yesterday. Zabiullah Shoja spokesman for Baghlan security command in a telephone contact told
BNA, the civilians were injured while a magnetic mine was planted in a corolla car carrying the civilians in
Abband District.

Security officials discovered and neutralized six mines from main roads of Urozgan province.
National army senior commander in south of the country told BNA, with planting of the mines, Taliban
wanted to organize a series of blasts on civilians, but not succeeded to their evil goals.

At least four people were injured on Tuesday when a magnetic bomb attached to an Afghan
local police vehicle exploded in northern Baghlan province. Zabihullah Shujai, provincial police spokesman, told Pajhwok Afghan News the explosion took place in Markzai Chwak area of Pul-i-Khumri, the provincial
capital.