Six armed Taliban were killed in attack of Afghan Security Forces in Helmand province. The
insurgents riding bicycles were faced with ambush of Afghan security forces last night. A senior
commander of ANA in the south of the country told BNA, six armed militants were killed in the clash.
According to another report, the security forces discovered and neutralized six mines from busy roads of
Lashkargah city, Nadali and Geresh Districts.

Five Taliban militants have been killed by own explosion in southern Zabul province. Governor’s
spokesman, Gul Islam Seyal, told Pajhwok Afghan News that the incident took place when the rebels were
planting bomb under a bridge on Kabul-Kandahar highway in Shah Joi district of the province. The Taliban
in the past also blown up a bridge in the same area. Seyal said that some weapons the bomb planters
carrying with themselves also destroyed in the incident.

A police official was killed and four civilians were in a blast caused by a magnetic bomb in the
provincial capital of northern Kunduz province. Police chief Brig. Gen. According to Pajhwok Afghan News
the blast ripped through a border police vehicle.

Six Afghan soldiers have been slightly wounded in a bomb attack in the capital. The ministry said
in a statement that two magnetic bombs placed on a power transmission tower exploded in Kabul on April
4 when members of the Afghan National Army (ANA) were passing by.

The Afghan intelligence operatives thwarted a deadly explosion plot in Lashkargah city, the
provincial capital of southern Helmand province. The local officials said a motorcycle packed with
explosives was discovered before the militants manage to use for an attack in the city.

Two Daesh rebels were killed and an explosives-laden vehicle seized during a raid in Chapahar
district of eastern Nangarhar province. A statement from the governor's house the slain Daesh rebels had
been planning an attack in Jalalabad, the provincial capital, 'on an important government organ. But their
plan was frustrated after the bomb-rigged car was confiscated and the two Daesh men were killed.

At least two people were wounded after an explosion rocked near a big mosque in central
neighborhood of Kabul, capital of Afghanistan.

A local Taliban leader was killed along with another militant in a premature explosion triggered
by an Improvised Explosive Device in eastern Laghman province of Afghanistan. A statement further
added that the explosives went off prematurely as they were busy planting it, leaving two people dead,
including a local leader of the Taliban identified as Sayeda Gul.

The Afghan security forces have confiscated a cache containing ammunition for heavy weapons
during an operation in Kabul city. he officials further added that the Afghan forces confiscated three
rounds of 822mm mortar, two artillery rounds, six rounds of heavy anti-aircraft gun munitions, and seven
other type of mortar rounds from the cache.

A local Taliban leader was killed along with another militant in a premature explosion triggered
by an Improvised Explosive Device in eastern Laghman province of Afghanistan. The provincial
government media office in a statement said the two militants were looking to plan an Improvised
Explosive Device on a roadside frequented by the Afghan forces in Alisheng district.

Intelligence operatives have detained a would-be suicide bomber loyal to the Haqqani Network
in Gardez, the capital of southeastern Paktia province. he detainee had confessed to receiving terrorist
training in the Tal area of Pakistan’s Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province and planning a suicide attack in

Two mine planters and one civilian were killed and four others critically injured, as militants
were carrying out an attack with Improvised Explosive Device (IED) in a motorcycle in Afghanistan's
eastern province of Laghman. The incident happened Saturday afternoon in Qassaban area of Alingar
district of the province, where several armed militants were trying to blow up their explosives-laden
motorbike in a crowded area of the district centre, Afghan army 201 Selaab Corps based in the region.

Three civilians were martyred and four others have been injured in a mine blast in Ghor
province. A mine was planted in suburb of Ferozkoh city and exploded while passing of civilians from the
site.

Afghan officials say at least five people have been killed in what they said was a motorcycle
suicide bomb attack.