At the finish episode of the local campaing to choose a political representative in Segovia, an IED
was launched over the people who were closing the event, leaving almost nine injured, two of them were
policemen. At the area whrere were launched several tatucos, homemade mortar, threre were more than
four thousand people.

The troops of the Rapid Deployment Force No. 1 of the Omega Joint Task Force, while
developing area inspection and control actions in the village of Brisas, rural area of Mesetas, Meta,
destroyed an explosive device. The device, which threatened the safety of the peasants who live and
travel through this village, was found by the soldiers of this unit who constantly patrol these areas to avoid
any attack from residual organized armed groups. The device may be made of a 40-pound metallic
cylinder, an electric start system and an activation system, which was detonated in a controlled manner by
the EXDE group.

Colombia’s intelligence service and army seized a cache of rebel arms and explosives found
Tuesday in southern Colombia. The explosives and arms belonged to the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia (FARC) rebels, said the Administrative Department of Security (DAS). A factory that housed the
explosives and weapons amid the jungle in Vistahermosa was destroyed. The DAS and the Colombian
army seized 250 kg of TNT, 1,082 gallons of sulfuric acid, 800 gallons of ethylic alcohol and a great number
of supplies used to make explosives.

Two members from the former FARC launched two genades against two police patrol producing
several material damages and injured over the occupants.

An explosives blast killed at least eight Colombian police officers in northwest Colombia, where
armed drug smugglers are active. The police team had been escorting officials tasked with handing back
land to rural residents who were displaced by Colombia's half-century long conflict between the
government and Marxist FARC rebels, which came to an end under a November 2016 peace deal.

Authorities collected devices wih explosives during an operation carried out in Hato Corozal
locality. According to the Army brigade were defused two IEDs, each of then with five kg of black podwer,
anal and sharpnel.

The explosion of an IED provoked one killed and injured in a incident happened in the
Mazamorrero path, located in a rural area close to the municipality Santander de Quilichao.

Four people have been arrested in Ecuador in connection with the bombing attacks carried out
along the Colombian border in the early hours of Wednesday, Interior Minister Cesar Navas has
confirmed. No injuries have been reported, but the explosive was professionally constructed. There were
no victims, nor were any buildings damaged.

wenty-two people have been arrested in connection with the recent spate of bombings and
journalist kidnappings on the border of Colombia and Ecuador. The latest explosion, which occurred early
Wednesday in the town of Quininde in Esmeraldas province, was deliberate but no injuries or structural
damage were reported.