Residents at a Springfield apartment complex were evacuatedover a potential bomb threat.
The sheriff's office says they discovered credible information about the possibility of unknown explosives
and possible explosive devices both inside an apartment and in vehicles located in the parking area. The
residents were evacuated, and after fire marshals deemed the area safe.

Lowe's in Chico was evacuated after a suspicious package was located on the premises. Multiagency bomb squad responded to the scene after a suspicious package was located in the store. Police
located the package and determined that it was not explosive.

Renton police and the Port of Seattle bomb squad responded to the Renton Highlands area
Sunday afternoon on a report of a suspicious device. Renton police announcedthe device had been
cleared from the scene and the roads were reopened.

An elementary school in Dania Beach was evacuated Tuesday after a bomb threat was called
in. Students and staff were evacuated while a bomb squad investigated. Officials said the threat was
unfounded and the all-clear was issued

A city man has been arrested after police say he called in a false bomb threat to try to get out
of paying his restaurant bill. The suspect left the scene when a bomb threat was called in to a nearby
restaurant.

The Walmart in the Bayonne Crossing shopping center has been evacuated tonight after a
bomb threat was made at the store. All the roads in the area of the shopping center have been cleared
and closed, police said in radio transmissions. According to the officials the area was declared safe and the
situation came to the normality.

Walmart was evacuated in response to a suspicious phone call involving a bomb. No
explosive devices were found during a search of the facility.

he Bernalillo County Public Safety building was evacuated due to a bomb threat , but the
Albuquerque Police Department said officers did not find a suspicious package. After police checked the
scene, the evacuation was lifted and the police perimeter was reopened.

The “All Clear” has been given in a suspicious package investigation at a southwest Oklahoma
City Walmart store. The Bomb Squad was called in to investigate a brown briefcase left on the ground next
to a motorcycle, in the parking lot at the Walmart Supercenter. Bomb Squad determined that the contents
of the briefcase were non-threatening.

Central Campus in Minot has been evacuated following a report of a bomb threat. Police was
checking the school , and the students were held at the auditorium until the school is deemed safe to
return. After checking carried out the area was defined like safe.

The owners of an Evansville gas station are showing their appreciation to law enforcement
for their handling of a suspicious package found. Officers believed the object resembled a pipe bomb. t
turned out to be just a hoax and nothing terrible.

A bomb threat to a Massachusetts Walmart was apparently a hoax. The building was
evacuated and the arson and bomb squad conducted a search of the building. State police bomb-snuffing
dogs were also brought into the building. Nothing suspicious was found.

Hamilton County Sheriff Harrell Reid tells WCTV they received a call that someone had
reported to a clerk at the gas station that there was something suspicious in a stall in the women's
restroom. Sheriff Reid said they found a tied-up sock with sharp object protruding from it. Officials didn't
think it was suspicious.

An airport housekeeper performing regular duties found an unattended backpack in the
men’s room. The bag was determined to be of no consequence. The SBI bomb squad responded to the
airport after a crudely-made explosive device was found on the curb, which had a mason jar filled with
ammonium nitrate, nails and an alarm clock attached to the makeshift device.
UBank Robber Used Fake Bomb To Distract Police

A homeless bank robber gave himself the gift of distraction, leaving a fake, gift-wrapped
“bomb” at one Bronx bank. Anthony Bari, 56, left a hard plastic case covered in birthday wrapping paper
at the Citibank in Pelham Bay Thursday morning, telling an employee the box was for an assistant bank
manager. But the “present” included a nasty note. This is not a robbery. This boxwas an explosive device
and would detonate in five minutes. This incident was calified like a false event.

San Diego Police and firefighters on Friday destroyed a suspected pipe bomb left on trolley
tracks near the 12th and Imperial Avenue station. Officers said a transient took an object that looked like a
pipe bomb out of a trash can and dumped it by the trolley tracks. Officials said it turned out to be an
empty pipe.