Police evacuated the area around the Children's Museum of Atlanta as bomb technicians
investigated a suspicious package nearby on Baker Street. Police were called to the museum a for a
suspicious bag outside the museum.

A suspicious package that was found in Edmond was safe. Officials with the Edmond Police
Department say the suspicious package was found along Bryant. The bomb squad was called to the scene
and worked to determine what was inside the package. Officials say the package contained caution tape
and bailing wire.

Police called out the bomb squad to investigate a suspicious bag left outside a Downtown
Portland bank. Bomb technicians determined that there was nothing dangerous inside the bag.

Employees and customers of the Target and Publix stores on San Jose Boulevard were allowed
to enter the store more than four hours after police were called early Monday morning to investigate a
suspicious item. The suspicious item found behind the Target was a black battery box with an LED light.

Authorities evacuated Terminal 4 at the Ontario Airport after security came across a military or
law enforcement training device. After determining there was no threat, the airport continued its normal
operations.

Pima County's government complex on La Canada Drive in Green Valley was evacuated for 90
minutes Monday after a suspicious paper bag was found outside the Pima County Sheriff's Department.
The squad determined the bag contained eyeglass cases.

A woman was arrested after attempting to rob a Liberty Bank by threatening a teller with a
bomb and a kidnapped child. The teller the people holding her child would detonate the bomb if the bag
wasn't filled with money.

Wilmington police have closed a portion of Fourth Street as they investigate a suspicious
package in the downtown area. A car with a suspicious package was found inside a vehicle parked in a
Riverfront lot. The package turned out to be non-threatening.

Police responded Tuesday afternoon after a military-style ammunition box was discovered in
an alleyway in downtown Santa Barbara. The item later was determined to be harmless.

The Jacksonville Sheriff's Office is giving an "all clear" after they found two suspicious packages
on the city's Northside. Police found two packages and evacuated four homes and blocked off three
streets.

Putnam Co. Sheriff Eddie Farris has given the "all clear" after the old Putnam Co. Courthouse
was evacuated due to a bomb threat made online. Putnam County Sheriff's Office deputies and K-9 units
were sent to investigate the threat and determined there was no immediate danger to the old courthouse
or surrounding area.

Police closed the Kansas City, KS Police Department headquarters Wednesday morning after
the package was found nearby. The package was found on the southwest corner of Seventh Street and
Minnesota Avenue. Police say the bag was full of scrap metal.

The bomb squad has cleared a suspicious device in southwest Oklahoma City. The Oklahoma
City Police Department confirms that a resident called dispatch and stated they saw an object that
"appeared to be several sticks of dynamite. The device was cleared.

Officers have given the all-clear after a suspicious package was hand-delivered to Oglethorpe
University. Brookhaven police got the call from someone at the university. The package was handdelivered to the admissions office located in Lupton Hall. Police Bomb Squad responded and determined
the package had no mechanical devices that would make it explode and no chemicals that would be
harmful to anyone.

A suspicious item that turned out to be a toolbox prompted a bomb squad response to the Port
of Los Angeles. The item was attached to a shipping container. The Everport Container Terminal was
evacuated as a precaution while explosives experts worked to remove and assess the item, which turned
out to be a toolbox containing tools. The area was declared clear.