Soldiers from the 75th Infantry Battalion recovered an arms cache, and medical and food
supplies hidden by suspected communist rebels in Barangay Bunawan Brook in Bunawan. Datuin said soldiers also recovered assorted types of ammunition, six Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs), a rifle
grenade, 315 pieces super dyne explosives, six pieces blasting caps, three handheld radio batteries, 450
meters electrical wire, A Yamada generator set, an Acer multi-media projector, 28 gallons of rice, military
uniforms and personal belongings.

Atendees of the mass christening at St. Anthony Parish Church in Koronadal City, were left in
shock after an explosion just outside the church followed by authorities detonating a separate IED just a
few meters from the church. The explosion injured two people.

Russia's Federal Security Service (FSB) has prevented a planned terror attack in the country's
Rostov region by a cell of the Islamic State (IS) terrorist group. The cell's leader detonated an explosive
device and died while rendering armed resistance. Firearms including an AK-47 rifle, hand grenades,
ammunition for improvised explosive devices, as well as means of communication and electronic storage
devices containing propaganda materials of IS terrorist activities were seized at the scene of the incident.

After an anonymous bomb threat in the building of Russian Foreign Ministry located at
Smolenskaya-Sennaya st. 32/1, evacuation of all staff is under way. The source added that there was no
immediate information on how many people were evacuated from the building. After evaluating this
threat, officials declared like false alarm.

During the raid several weapons and explosives were found. Security forces foiled the terrorist
plots after the operation.

Police are hunting for a man who threatened to bomb Korea University. Police received a call.
Tuesday from a man who claimed he was heading to the university and carrying explosives. The man
called from a pay phone in Anam-dong, Seoul, where the university is located, according to police. Police
sent a bomb squad, detection dogs and fire engines and searched for three hours but found no explosives.

The Turkish military has defused nearly 650 improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and 80
landmines since the start of Operation Olive Branch in northwestern Syria's Afrin.

A massive explosion was heard throughout Damascus tonight after explosives were detonated
inside a militant tunnel. According to local reports, the explosion was a result of a tunnel bomb that was
detonated by militants in the last remaining Islamist-held part of the East Ghouta. No further details have
been released at this time.

One person was killed and six others wounded on Friday when an explosive device ripped
through a car in the capital Damascus. The bomb went off behind the Khansa Mosque in the Barzeh
neighborhood north of Damascus.

Two rebel fighters – a commander and his bodyguard – of Free Syrian Army affiliate Jaysh al-Izza
have been killed in an IED (improvised explosive device) attack in southern Idlib province. Sources say that the two were traveling in a car throughout the countryside ‘near the town of Khan Sheikhoun.’ The exact
road on which they struck the IED has not yet been clarified in early reports. Some sources say that the IED
was planted inside the targeted vehicle.

Five civilians were killed and 30 others wounded Saturday by the rebels' mortar shells amid
intensifying military showdown in Damascus' Douma district, according to the state news agency SANA.
The mortar shells fired by the Islam Army in Douma in the Eastern Ghouta countryside of the capital
slammed several neighborhoods.

An explosion killed eleven people and wounded more than 80 on Monday in the rebelcontrolled Syrian city of Idlib, the Syrian Observatory for Human Rights said.

Tens of people have been killed or wounded in a huge explosion in the central part of Idlib city
amid intensifying tensions among terrorist groups in the region, the London-based Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights (SOHR) reported. The SOHR said that a sum of 19 people was killed in a huge blast near alMotlaq Square in Idlib city on Monday night. It further said that 81 more were wounded in the blast,
adding that the death toll is rising as some of the injured are in critical conditions.

A number of SDF militants were killed and several more were wounded in a booby-trap blast in
the town of al-Shadadi in Southern Hasaka. In the meantime, local sources reported residents' rage
against the Kurdish fighters in the region specially after SDF's forced recruitment plan in the region.

Damascus Countryside, SANA-Syrian Arab Army discovered ammunition depots and explosive
materials, including Saudi-made ones, during the sweeping operations in Zamalka town in Eastern Ghouta.
an army unit discovered explosive materials, some of them are Saudi-made, and equipment devised for mixing them with highly–explosive materials such as C4 and chlorine to augment the destructive capacity
of shells and inflict as much damage as possible to civilians and residential areas.