Police have given the all-clear after a bomb scare in Boynton Beach. Authorities received a call
about a suspicious item at Congress Avenue and Ocean Drive. Police shut down the road. Boynton Beach
Police said the bomb squad from the Palm Beach County Sheriff's Office responded to investigate. The
bomb squad said the suspicious item turned out to be a pressure cooker that someone left on a bench at a
bus stop.

Oak Creek Police were called for a report of possible explosives at a house. The Milwaukee
County Sheriff's Office was called for their Explosives unit who confirmed the ordnance was live and
unexploded. The ordnance was removed from the home, but was unstable and needed to be disposed of.
Authorities moved the explosives to a remote area near the Oak Creek Police Department to be exploded.

A written bomb threat caused the partial evacuation of an upland hospital Monday afternoon
before authorities deemed the threat to be unfounded. Staff at San Antonio Regional Hospital began evacuating non patients after finding a piece of paper inside the hospital listing activation times. The
hospital initially started evacuating the non patients and so they asked us to hold the perimeter so they
can complete that. Nothing suspicious was found.

Coeur d’Alene police detained a man who claimed he had a bomb in his car. Police said the
man went into Hampton Inn and Suites near Riverstone Park and walked up to the front desk saying he
had a bomb in his vehicle. As a result, the hotel and surrounding businesses were evacuated for several
hours while police investigated. At about noon, a robot was deployed to search the vehicle, but no
explosives were found.

 Eyewitness News Reporter Brianna Strunk is reporting that the Monroe County Court House is
closed. The Monroe County Courthouse is closed due to a bomb threat. A similar threat made in early
May. Nothing suspicious was found.

The Berkeley County Sheriff's Office is investigating a suspicious package at the Berkeley
County courthouse. The suspicious package was discovered this morning during a security sweep,
according to spokesman Mike Cochran with the Berkeley County Sheriff's Office. The situation at the
courthouse has been resolved.

Coral Springs Police received two threats regarding a bomb threat at Walmart and on the life of
a March for our Lives activist. Police were called to the scene to the Walmart Supercenter at 6001 Coral
Ridge Drive after receiving a phone call there was a bomb located inside the store. All customers and
employees were evacuated and according to Detective Bruna, nothing suspicious was found. The store
resumed business as usual an hour later. In a second incident, a caller threatened the home of March For
Our Lives activist Sarah Chadwick in the Wyndham Lakes community. So far they have found no threat
and believe this was another “swatting” call. Police believe that the calls were made by the same person

A bomb threat was received by a Peter Pan bus teller, who said the threat was made by phone
and referenced Union Station as the location. The city recently opened a police substation at Union
Station. Responding officers “immediately began to evacuate and secure the property,” police said. In
addition, train service into the state was halted as officers conducted a search of the property and
surrounding area. Nothing was found.

Red Wing police responded to a bomb threat called into Alliance Bank, 840 Technology Drive.
The threat was not found to be credible, however, bank employees who had evacuated to the parking lot
were allowed to reenter the building and conduct normal closing procedures.

Two devices that officials say were “essentially a homemade bomb” were found in a residential
neighborhood in Davis County. The items looked like tennis balls, but were filled with an explosive
substance, according to information from the Clinton Police Department.

Police say they have cleared the scene and no evidence of a bomb was found in Perry Technical
Institute. Law enforcement is surrounding Perry Tech where an alleged bomb threat was reported. Police
said the school was evacuated and students were released to go home

