Two additional devices have allegedly been found at the home of a man charged after Monday's
bomb scare outside Redbank Plaza. Queensland Police officers executed a search warrant at a Camira
property this afternoon where two further devices were located, rendered safe and dismantled by
specialist police. Police will allege property including a firearm, dangerous drugs and utensils were also
located. Police have charged two people after an explosive device was located in a vehicle at Redbank
Plaza. THE car carrying a portable bomb "capable of causing serious injury" to people has been removed
from Redbank Plaza. Queensland Police are now attempting to piece together the motives of a man and a
woman arrested after police found an explosive device, allegedly in their vehicle. Senior Sergeant Gareth
James confirmed police found a "fairly large glass jar" containing an explosive liquid and other
components.

A "suspicious device" found at an Adelaide bowling alley has prompted a bomb scare, but police
now say it was a false alarm. It was originally thought it was a homemade bomb but police have now
confirmed it was not a threat.

The bag, which caused authorities to cordon off the area, had a note stuck on the front that read
"Bomb to Brisbane" with the word "Mumbai" squeezed below in smaller print. According to Devi Jothiraj,
Lakshmi's daughter, her mother explained to officials with the Australian Federal Police that it was all just
a "mix-up".

A Melbourne petrol station has been deemed safe by the Bomb Response Unit after a suspicious
device was found. The object which sparked the emergency response was later found to be drug
paraphernalia.

Police closed the road outside Movie World and called in the bomb squad after a "taped-up
container" was found. Officers discovered the suspicious device, believed to be an esky, just before
midday and closed Entertainment Road in Oxenford. The Explosive Ordnance Response Team (EORT) was
called in just after 1pm and within 30 minutes had given the all-clear.

Police have given the all-clear after a bomb scare triggered by a suspicious package was found
near the Australian Federal Police headquarters. The bomb was inspectionated and was declared render
safe.