Two policemen were killed and another one was injured in a car bomb explosion in Diala
province, a police source said on Tuesday. “A car rigged with explosives went off near a police vehicle in alSaadiya district, south of Khanaqin, killing two policemen, including a captain, and injuring another one.

Ten mourners were killed and fourteen wounded Thursday in bomb explosions while mourners
were burying four people killed earlier in the day by Islamic State militants in Iraq's central province of
Salahudin. The incident took place in the afternoon when roadside bombs detonated near mourners who
gathered at the cemetery of Sdeira al-Suflah.

Four people were killed and eight others injured Thursday in two attacks by Islamic State (IS)
militants in Iraq's central province of Salahudin, a provincial security source said. Many of the villagers
took up their arms to support the security forces in their pursuit of the IS attackers. But four villagers were
killed and four others were wounded in the explosions of several roadside bombs detonated by IS
militants.

Security forces found /30 /explosive devices in a number of areas in Anbar. The Spokesman for
the Security Information Center Brigadier Yehia Rasool said in a statement that "the security forces in the
Command of Operations east of Anbar found two explosive devices and a grenade during a search in AlLuhaib area, and found and detonated in Al-Maamel area 15 explosive devices and cleared a road length
of 4 km from the Japanese bridge towards Saqlawiyah, and found 13 explosive devices in Al-Musalaha
area were detonated without incident.

A car bomb killed a civilian and wounded eleven others in a car bomb attack on a convoy of a
Turkmen candidate in the center of the city of Kirkuk today. A police source told NINA that a car, parked
on the main road in the area of cars showrooms in Al-Khadra neighborhood in the center of Kirkuk,
exploded when the Kirkuk Turkmen Front candidate's convoy passed, killing two civilians and injuring
eleven others, including three of his bodyguards.

An Iraqi civilian was wounded Sunday as a locally-made bomb exploded in southern capital
Baghdad.

An Iraqi Turkmen Front’s (ITF) candidate in parliamentary polls survived a suicide car bomb
attack in the northern Iraqi city of Kirkuk. The incident took place in front of a used car showroom in Hadra
district, from where the parliament candidate Ammar Kahya’s convoy was passing by. Kahya survived the
attack without being hurt but one person was killed and 11 others.

Anbar Operations Command announced on Thursday dismantling 40 improvised explosive
devices, in addition to seizing large quantities of weapons and equipment in the area of al-Tharthar basin,
in northern Ramadi.

One of the people wounded in the attack against a police station, south of Samarra, Salahuddin
province, has succumbed to death, making the total death toll rise to four victims. one of the security
personnel wounded during the attack by Islamic State members against Dalf police station in al-Abbassi
region.

Twenty Iraqi civilians were wounded Monday in a grenade attack by a militant on a house in
Ramadi city, in central Iraq. A militant hurled a grenade at a house owned by an Iraqi civilian.

Five iraqi soldiers were wounded in a bomb explosion south of Baqubah, the capital of Iraq’s
Diyala. An explosive charge planted on the side of a road at al-Naqib village, south of Baqubah.

Five Iraqi civilians were killed while eleven others injured as two bombs exploded near a
popular market in Mosul city. Two explosive charges planted by Islamic State militants went off at alMaash market in western Mosul, 400 km north of Baghdad.

Army's eighth legion found explosive materials used in manufacturing blasts in west Anbar.
The explosive materials are 60L of Ammonium nitrate is used in manufacturing the blasts, found at alQaem district.

The Security forces blew up thirty three explosive devices and arrested six wanted men for the
judiciary in different parts of Nineveh. Spokesman for the Security Information Center Brigadier Yehia
Rasool said in a statement that "the security forces in the Command of the Operations of Nineveh
detonated 10 explosive devices in the area of Sheheiba and detonated 17 other bombs on site in the area
of Ammar Kaber, and detonated eight more in the Wana area." He added that another force arrested 6
wanted men in the area of Al-Kawar, while the engineering effort blew two explosive devices in Al-Siniya
region and six other bombs in the village of Qartba Hill.