The Police Command in Borno said four Boko Haram terrorists were killed by Improvised
Explosive Devices (IEDs) strapped to their bodies in Mainari Kanuri and Shua villages in Konduga Local
Government Area of the state.

A total of five civilian Joint Task Force personnel and seventeen others have been killed in
injured Mandariri, a community in Konduga LGA of Borno State in a a suicide bomb attack. A male suicide
bomber who hid the IED between his thighs making it hard to detect, detonated the bomb and caused the
massive casualties.

At least four people were killed in northeast Nigeria in a suicide blast at an open-air mosque,
militia and refugee camp. The suspected Boko Haram bomber, who requested anonymity, was disguised
as a worshipper, detonated his explosives at a camp for people displaced by the insurgency in Dikwa, a
town 90 kilometres (55 miles) east of Maiduguri, the Borno state capital.

Authorities of Operation Lafiya Dole disclosed on Sunday that many Muslim worshippers
partaking in early morning prayers were saved instant death when a female suicide bomber penetrated
the prayer session but was prevented from detonating the suicide vests strapped to her body. This female
had infiltrated the mosque, while members were aboujt to commernce a prayer session but was detected
when struggling to detonate a suicide vest strapped to her body.

Two female suicide bombers suspected to be Boko Haram jihadists killed at least three people
in northeast Nigeria. The bombers detonated their explosives inside a house and near a mosque in the
Mashamari area of Konduga, 35km southeast of the Borno State capital Maiduguri.

At least seven Kenyan soldiers were killed and two others seriously injured after a powerful
improvised explosive device (IED) targeted a military vehicle near the Somali town of Dhobley near the
border with Kenya. The vehicle was in a convoy on patrol when it was hit by the IED, causing a massive
explosion. The al-Shabab militant group claimed killing 15 soldiers in the explosion. Kenyan military
officials could not be reached for comment.

Massive explosion has been reported between Elwak town and Tukolo area near Kenyan border
with Somalia. The target of the explosion remains unknown.

At least seven civilian people have been sustained injuries on when mortar rounds rained down
on Somalia’s capital Mogadishu.

At least eleven people were killed in an explosion in a busy market in a small Somali city north of
Mogadishu. More than ten others were wounded in the blast which we are still investigating, some of the
victims have serious wounds and they are admitted at hospital.

At least seven Somali government soldiers were killed and others injured in a deadly bomb
attack on Thursday targeting a military vehicle in Wanlaweyn town in southern Somalia.

Four people have been killed and five others injured in roadside bomb explosion in Bulomarer
town. The explosion went off at livestock market in the town, leaving four people dead, a domestic
animals trader.

Two people have been killed and three others injured grenade bomb explosion and mortar
attacks in Somalia’s capital Mogadishu. unknown armed men hurled two grenade bombs at house
inhibited by security officer in Wabari area, leaving at least two guards and a civilian injured.

A suicide car bomber from Somalia’s Islamist group al Shabaab hit a military convoy outside
Mogadishu, causing an unknown number of deaths. The attack targeting a passing military convoy
occurred in Afgoye, a district about 30 km northwest of Mogadishu.

A witness says at least one person was killed in a huge car bomb blast in Mogadishu, the Somali
capital. The explosion has resulted from an improvised explosive device [IED] fitted into a vehicle said to
be belonging to a member of Somali security force.

South African Police Service (SAPS) officers have arrested seven suspects in North West and
Limpopo in separate incidents this weekend for possession of explosive devices and conspiracy to commit
an offence, in the process preventing potential automated teller machine (ATM) robberies. The team went to another village, called Lekgaleng, to search for a black BMW with three occupants implicated in
the planning of ATM bombing at a local business centre. The car was spotted and stopped. Police seized
the car along with potentially incriminating items. The three suspects were arrested for conspiracy to
commit robbery involving ATM bombings.