The Ferdinand Police Department was called to the report of a suspicious package
located outside of the plant by a railing next to a culvert. Police say a MasterBrand employee notified
supervisors and safety personnel about the discovery of the small packing and its location. Police said it
was completely out of the ordinary to have anything be where the package was located. The EOD team
advised that the target package did not contain a hazard. It was removed by state police.

Employees at the Home Depot Distribution Center were evacuated due to a threat. Nothing
was found.

Police called a bomb squad to a traffic stop Thursday afternoon. It happened near the Save-ALot in Manchester. Police found a suspicious device, but it turned out not to be a bomb.

Police cordoned off a Harvest Lane residence Thursday morning and called in the state police
bomb squad after finding what looked like bomb-making material in the house. However, it turned out the
items were construction material.

The Columbus Division of Fire detonated a suspicious package in Whitehall. The Whitehall
Division of Police and Columbus Fire crews responded to a report of a suspicious package at a building in
the area of East Main Street and Beechwood Avenue. The scene was declared safe.

A bomb squad responded to a suspicious package at a Broward Sheriff's Office district office in
Parkland. Officers and a bomb squad robot were examining the package outside the office. Nothing
suspicious was found.

All clear given at Legacy Park after the Venice Police Department responded to a suspicious
device.

Higgins Avenue was temporarily shut down Friday night, after police received a call about a
suspicious item near a bank. The bomb team found no threat.

Charleston PD responded to a bomb threat at the Holiday Inn Express on Civic Center Drive.
The Kanawha County Bomb Squad and Sheriffs' Department were called in and the hotel was evacuated,
while dogs checked the building. It was ultimately determined to be an invalid threat.

A suspicious package has now been cleared by Tallahassee Police. Police did not say what was
inside the suspicious package, but they confirm it was nothing dangerous.

 A pipe bomb has possibly been found tonight in North Oakland. The device was located in the
500 block of 62nd Street. Police decided to block off the area. Technicians declared the area safe.

U.S. Route 22 are reopened in Somerset after the Somerset Police Department said a possible
pipe bomb was found. The Perry County Sheriff's Office said it was a confirmed explosive device and it was
detonated under controlled conditions. The elementary school was not affected and buses were routed
around the affected area, according to the sheriff's office.

Officers closed down an I-205 on-ramp in Vancouver Monday after finding a “suspicious
object” on the side of the road near Mill Plain Boulevard. Vancouver Police said they found a pressure
cooker along the side of the road near the westbound lanes. Officials declared the area safe.

The Pueblo Police Department bomb squad responded to a suspicious device. The item was
later determined not to be dangerous. No one was arrested.