Lincoln Police are investigating after a mailbox was blown up and a mysterious note was slid
under a door by a man in a mask. Police said the mailbox was completely destroyed but no one was hurt.
The victim told police she was in her garage when she heard a car pull up, a loud boom, and the car drive
away. She then found her mailbox in several pieces on the ground.

Pittsburgh authorities, including a bomb squad, were investigating a possible suspicious package
outside PNC Park on Wednesday afternoon as the Pirates and Twins played in snowy conditions.
Pittsburgh police spokesperson Alicia George told USA TODAY Sports police were alerted to a suspicious
package near a FedEx box located near PNC Park an hour before the Pirates game. Robots were deployed.
The scene was declared safe.

Anchorage's largest hospital was alerted of a threat against the structure. The bomb threat was
reported to 911 at Providence Alaska Medical Center, and Anchorage police got involved. From there,
security forces will comb through the building, clearing it of any potential threats.

Evacuations at the 2nd District Court in Ogden ended following an unsubstantiated bomb threat.
Ogden police and Weber County deputies received a call reporting the threat. The source of the threat is
still unknown.

A bomb threat for a Florence restaurant forced the evacuation several businesses in the South
Cashua Drive area, but no hazardous devices were located by Florence Police.

Abilene Police Department responded to the Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and
Boyhood Home located at 200 Southeast Fourth Street in Abilene for the report of a phone-in bomb
threat. Approximately 200 visitors and staff members were evacuated from the campus, and the campus
was secured. No suspicious items were located during the search.

A Yolo County explosive ordnance disposal team rendered safe a suspicious package at the
Solano County Administration. The package was found this morning at 675 Texas St. The Solano County
courthouse remained open during the incident.

There were plenty of concerns when an Allen Toyota employee brought a "suspicious" package
he had received the day before to work. The package was unexpected, which sparked suspicion on the
heels of the exploding packages investigation that recently held Texas hostage. He said law enforcement
followed protocol with the bomb squad until the package could be cleared.

A 49-year-old man was taken into custody after two small explosive devices were detonated
Thursday afternoon inside a Sam's Club in Ontario. Bomb squad personnel confirmed that two homemade
devices were detonated, but there were no injuries or significant damage.

A 51-year-old southwest Nebraska man was arrested Friday after authorities found an
improvised explosive device in his residence. The patrol said troopers had also learned that at least one
threat included mention of an improvised explosive device. The patrol said its bomb squad rendered the
device safe.

A portion of the Las Vegas Strip was blocked off Friday afternoon due to a suspicious vehicle and
package, according to Las Vegas Metro police. Police said the vehicle and package were found in the area
of Las Vegas Boulevard and Wynn Drive. After an investigation, police determined it was not a threat.

Greenville County, SC - Fox Carolina studios off of Pelham Road in Greenville County have been
evacuated after a suspicious package was delivered to their studios. The Greenville County Sheriff's Office
said they got the call shortly after noon.

Walmart on Abilene's northside has been given the all-clear after a bomb threat prompted an
evacuation. Police said a bomb threat was called into the store at about 1 p.m. Police cleared the business
and normal operations resumed.

The Whidbey Island Naval Air Station went on lockdown Friday afternoon after a bomb threat
was made. Base gates, which had been closed, were opened. The order to shelter in place was lifted
except for those within the police barrier. The officials didn´t find anything.

The discovery of a grenade in a donation bin at a Goodwill Industries store in Berks County
prompted a call to the bomb squad. he discovery by a Goodwill employee was reported shortly after 12:30
p.m. Friday at the store in the 600 block of East Lancaster Avenue in Cumru Township. The first officers on
the scene quickly cleared the building of all employees and customers, and they closed nearby streets
while they waited for the Reading police bomb squad to respond.