A Los Angeles Police Department Bomb squad was on the scene of a residential neighborhood in
the Trousdale Estates area Friday afternoon. The LAPD bomb squad was called to Lania Lane on a report of
a suspicious item, according to the LAPD. Residents were advised to avoid the area. The incident was
declared safe.

The Columbus Division of Fire was called to the Anthony Thomas facility after a suspicious
package was found inside the west Columbus factory. Officials say the bomb squad was called to the
facility located in the 1700 block of Arlingate Lane. As it turns out the suspicious package was candy. There
is no word on what kind of candy was in the package.

Offices in the 400 block of Freeport Road in Aspinwall were evacuated for about an hour today
while the Allegheny County bomb squad evaluated packages found by the Norfolk Southern rail lines. Fire
Chief Gene Marsico said crews found nothing dangerous. It seem iIt was a pump and a box of liquids.

A suspicious package left in front of the Bales Thriftway store in Aloha prompted the
Washington County Sheriff's Office to send the bomb squad, but the all-clear was given within the hour.
The package was found underneath the mailbox with no return address and excessive postage. Deputies
believe whoever the sender was just didn't want to wait in line and left it outside for pick-up. Bomb
technicians scanned the box and deemed it safe.

The Prescott Regional Communications Center (PRCC) received a phone call from a possible
male caller (we think some sort of voice distortion was used), who stated that there was a bomb at the
Courthouse. The Courthouse was evacuated and a bomb dog worked the area. Nothing suspicious was
located.

Honolulu police have reopened several Downtown roads after conducting an investigation into
the discovery of a suspicious package. The scene was cleared .

Officials said evacuations have been lifted and roads have been reopened after a bomb threat
near the Willows Airport. The Bomb Task Force was activated and rendered the vehicle safe, and the
evacuation of the area was lifted. Officials declared not to find anything.

A suspicious package in Calabasas prompted evacuations on Monday as bomb squad and
hazmat crews responded to the scene. Los Angeles County firefighters were called to the 26000 block of
Mureau Road to investigate what they said was a suspicious box. Nearby businesses were temporarily
evacuated.

An NYPD spokesman confirmed officials were investigating a report of a suspicious item, but
could not provide further details about the response. A source with knowledge of the investigation told
the Advance police received a tip about a SnapChat photo of what appeared to be a suicide vest. It
appears to either be a hoax.

Police Officers with the Newark Police Department responded to Planned Parenthood, located
at 140 East Delaware Avenue, near the University of Delaware campus, for reports of a suspicious
package. The suspicious package has been cleared by the Delaware State Police EOD Unit. The package
was determined to have been addressed to an employee at that location, and it contained a file with
papers in it.

Faculty members found a box with wires in the church office and called the Elk Grove Police
Department. The Sacramento County Sheriff's Department's bomb squad eventually determined the
package was non-explosive.

Pocatello dispatch received a 911 call from a man who reportedly sounded very upset and
threatened to blow up the courthouse. When the operator asked him which courthouse. The Federal
Courthouse, County Courthouse, Juvenile Courthouse and the surrounding county court buildings were all
evacuated and are currently being searched. Nothing was found.

The Northwest Herald headquarters on Route 31 in Crystal Lake briefly closed Monday morning
due to concerns over a "suspicious" package that turned out to be benign. Police kept employees away
from the building and parking lot while a bomb squad checked out the package and determined it to be
harmless.

A bomb threat was called in this morning to the Portsmouth Judicial Center, forcing the
evacuation of the building and delaying the trial of a 16-year-old boy charged with trying to kill a
Portsmouth police officer, according to the sheriff's office.