Iranian forces in Saravan region confiscated the cargo of explosives loaded on a Toyota pick-up
car. He noted that the outlaws escaped and left the explosives following the border guards' ambush, and
said that a Kalashnikov rifle concealed in the car's fuel tank was also seized. Molla-Shahi said that the
outlaws who are on the run will be identified and arrested. Sistan and Balouchestan Province borders
Pakistan and Afghanistan and has a long coastline to the North of Oman Sea.

Iranian security forces have discovered and captured a large cache of explosives in the
country's eastern border areas. The forces thwarted terrorist groups' plots to transfer 80 kilograms of
composite explosives, 17 booby traps, 28 pistols with 2,100 bullets, 35 hand grenades, tens of electronic
detonators and other explosive equipment through technical and intelligence operations, the statement
added. It noted that 580 kilograms of narcotics were also seized from the terrorists.

Three Iranian security personnel were killed by militants in a cross-border attack on the frontier
with Pakistan. An Iranian police officer was killed in an ambush on a border post in the city of Mirjaveh in
Sistan-Baluchestan province, and two soldiers died when their vehicle was hit by an improvised explosive
device (IED).

Two people were wounded in a bomb attack that hit northern Baghdad shops. An explosive
charge went off near industrial shops in al-Taji district, north of Baghdad. The explosion left two people
injured.

Three people were wounded as a bomb blast targeted a bus in south of Baghdad. A bomb,
planted under a bus, went off while passing at al-Bayaa’ region, south of Baghdad, leaving three people
wounded.

The joint security forces destroyed a cache of weapons and explosives northeast of Baquba. A
source in Diyala operations command told NINA that joint security forces carried out a military operation
to track Daesh cells in Ein Laila, Nrain Bridge, Abu Sakhul and Khallawiya villages, which are located in the
vicinity of Qara Tabah district, northeast of Baquba.

Three civilians were killed and injured Monday in a bomb blast in Anbar province. A bomb
believed to be left by Islamic State militants went off in al-Tin district in al-Qa’im, west of Anbar, leaving
one person dead and two others injured.

In a special operation carried out by Iraqi army, a huge quantity of Explosive Devices were Found
in severeal caches aroun the Western Sinjar.

Four children were wounded Monday as a bomb exploded outside a medical complex in the
Christian town of Bartella. An explosive charge believed to be planted by Islamic State (IS) militants went
off while four children were playing outside a medical complex at the Christian-majority Bartella town in
eastern Mosul.

An explosive charge fixed into a car went off in al Radwaneya neighborhood in southwestern
Baghdad, leaving the car’s driver wounded.

Two suicide attackers were killed, while three rest houses of Islamic State members were
destroyed, north of Ramadi city. Security troops carried out a wide-scale military operation in al-Therthar
island, north of Ramadi, leaving two suicide bombers killed, three rest houses of IS destroyed and a
weapon stash exploded.

Three people were wounded as a bomb blast took place in north of Baghdad. The bomb was
placed placed near stores at al-Mushahada region in Tarmiyah district, north of Baghdad.

The seizure of missiles and improvised explosive devices in a security operation northeast of
Diyala. The popular crowd on Saturday seized missiles and improvised explosive devices and launched a
joint security operation northeast of Diyala. Based on accurate intelligence, the popular crowd and the
security forces carried out a joint security operation to hunt down terrorist cells in the Babil area of
Muqdadiya district, northeast of Diyala.