A terrorist bunker containing five homemade bombs was discovered and destroyed Saturday by
a detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP) in the province of Tizi Ouzou, announced the National
Defence Ministry in a statement.

Two bunkers for terrorists containing two homemade guns, a grenade and detonation tools
were discovered and destroyed Tuesday by a detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP) in the
province of Batna.

As part of the fight against terrorism and thanks to the efforts exerted by the units of the
People’s National Army, a terrorist surrendered to the military authorities in Skikda. As detachments of
the ANP discovered and destroyed, during search operations conducted in Chlef and Ain Defla, two (02)
homemade bombs.

As part of the fight against organized crime, a detachment of the ANP intercepted, in
Tamanrasset, (05) smugglers and seized one (01) firearm, a quantity of ammunition, (02) vehicles while –
one (01) tonnes of food, (600) liters of fuel and gold washing tools, (4,250) tobacco units were seized in
Biskra.

Two bunkers for terrorists containing home-made bomb a batch of ammunition has been
destroyed Monday in Bouira, by a detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP.

A detachment of the People's National Army found and destroyed six homemade bombs, on
Thursday in Batna (435-km east of Algiers).

ne bunker for terrorists containing home-made bombs and a quantity of munitions was
discovered and destroyed Saturday, in Batna.
BURKINA FASO

Burkinabe authorities have arrested around one hundred people and seized explosives in
operations in eastern and northern regions near the Malian border where jihadists are active.
BURUNDI

A grenade explosion killed two people and injured 14 others in Gitega Province, central Burundi.
An unidentified person blasted a grenade in a village bar in the Gitega district.

Two suicide bombers were killed while two other people injured in Cameroon's Far North Region
near the Nigerian border. Midjiyawa Bakari, governor of the Far North region, said a young girl blew
herself up when she noticed that members of the vigilance committee had spotted her. Two members of
the vigilance committee of Djakana village were injured by the explosion. The second girl, who was also
carrying explosives, was shot dead by soldiers of the Rapid Intervention Battalion.

The forces destroyed 993 terrorist dens, hideouts and storehouses and busted and destroyed a
workshop for making explosives as well as 163 explosive devices planted to target the raiding forces.

Eight Egyptian soldiers and 14 militants were killed in fighting in central Sinai on Saturday when
gunmen carrying explosive belts and grenades targeted a military checkpoint. Four of them detonated
their explosive belts, killing the soldiers and wounding 15 others.

The southern side of Sabha's historic castle has been heavily damaged as a result of falling
rockets after renewed clashes with heavy and medium weapons in its vicinity took place between Tabu
and Awlad Suleiman tribes. Meanwhile, a spokesperson for Sabha Medical Centre, Osama Al-Wafi, said
one person was killed and another wounded in the ongoing fighting in the city.