Chief of Police in Saiburee, Pattani province, has reported that a remote-controlled bomb
exploded early Saturday, injuring four police and two civilians, in the latest violence in Thailand’s
insurgency-plagued south. Pattani is one of three Muslim-majority provinces bordering Malaysia that have
been troubled by violence since a Muslim insurgency reignited in 2004.

At least four people were injured when three bombs exploded simultaneously at several
locations in Sungai Golok, southern Thailand, near Rantau Panjang in Kelantan. The motive of the bomb 
COUNTER IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE attacks is believed to be to sabotage the Sungai Golok Annual Food Festival (which began last) Saturday
and ends this Wednesday.

Panic gripped residents of Al Mahattah area in Sharjah after a bomb scare, when a mysterious
case was found at the entrance of a building near the Two Dirhams Center on Al Estiqlal Street. Police told
Khaleej Times that the operations room received a call warning about an alleged case with a bomb that
had been placed outside a building. Several police teams - including explosives experts, patrols, CID - and
ambulance, civil defence team and firefighters arrived at the site and thoroughly combed the area for
explosive devices. The Sharjah Police then declared it was just a hoax and no bomb was present.

The UAE Armed Forces on Tuesday seized an Iranian-made Qasif-1 drone laden with explosives
and trying to infiltrate sites close to the Yemeni forces loyal to the legitimate government, which is
supported by the Arab coalition forces in the western coast of Yemen. Upon checking the unmanned
combat aerial vehicle's components, specialised teams of the UAE armed forces discovered a large
amount of explosive material intended to be used against targets, according to official news agency WAM.

Yemen's Houthis rebels said they had targeted a warship in the Red Sea. However other sources
say an oil tanker was hit. Early reports indicate the ship suffered a slight hit but was able to continue on its
journey through the Red Sea. Saudi coalition spokesman Turki al-Maliki said Yemen rebels had launched a
“terrorist attack” on one of the oil tankers.The attack, in international waters west of the port of
Hodeidah, was stopped when a warship arrived at the scene.

Two women were martyred and three others wounded on Sunday evening as the militiamen of
Houthi launched heavy and indiscriminate shelling targeted populated areas of Hays district eastern
Alhodaidah province.

At least four people were killed and five others injured in a landmine blast in Yemen's
southeastern province of Shabwa.

Emirati forces in Yemen intercepted a drone on Wednesday believed to be targeting Arab
coalition forces deployed along the western coast of Yemen. The drone, which the military identified as an
Iranian-made Qusaf-1, was carrying explosives. Military sources told Sky News Arabia that the intended
target was coalition forces along the Red Sea coast making a push for the Yemeni port city of Hodeidah.
The Arab coalition is preparing for a renewed push to capture Hodeidah from the Iran-backed Houthi
rebels.

A suicide bomber in the city of Ibb in Yemen has attacked a cultural celebration, detonating his
vest in the midst of celebrations of Mohammed's birthday. A suicide bomber killed at least 33 people in
central Yemen on Wednesday when he blew himself up at a cultural centre where students were
celebrating Prophet Mohammed's birthday.