Several handheld explosive devices were found Friday at a home in North Port in Sarasota
County. Residents in the area reported hearing explosions. Residents of the home were taken into custody
for questioning. The investigation is active and ongoing.

Authorities have given the all clear to a Bethlehem Area School District school. Emergency
personnel completed a search of Freedom High School and deemed the building safe. Authorities
evacuated the Bethlehem Township school after a bomb threat was found written on a bathroom wall.

No hazardous materials or explosive device was found inside a suspicious package located in
City Hall. Part of City Hall was evacuated following the discovery of a suspicious package in the lobby. A
message on the box indicated a bomb threat.

Authorities are looking for a person responsible for leaving a bomb outside of a hotel. an
“oblong” device with a “fuse sticking out of it” outside of the north entrance. A bomb squad from the
Spokane Police Department was called in to investigate the device further. Police said the squad was able
to destroy the bomb – described as a homemade explosive device wrapped in electrical tape – without
attempting detonation. Spokane police believe the propellant contained within came from a commercial
firework.

A disgruntled customer prompted a partial shutdown of a terminal at La Guardia Airport on
Saturday morning after telling an airline employee he had a bomb. The New York Police Department’s
bomb squad investigated the bag and determined the threat was unfounded.

National Historical Park was evacuated Saturday due to the discovery of a suspicious item on
the site during the battlefield’s anniversary weekend. The Virginia State Police Bomb Squad rendered the
device safe, but according to the release, K9 units continued to search the battlefield. Officials have not
given a description of the device.

A suspicious package delivered to Goodnight Middle School in San Marcos led to a response
from the bomb squad. After scanning the package they determined the contents were not harmful.

The Pima County Sheriff's Department said Drexel is back open after a bomb scare closed the
road between Hildreth and Oriole for almost two hours

A bomb threat written inside a Port-a-John halted construction happening at Lexington
Medical Center. The message was written inside a portable bathroom at the hospital's new patient care
tower and discovered on Monday. No bomb was found.

The Peck School of the Arts on the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee campus reopened
after more than an hour-long closure as authorities investigated what was said to be a suspicious"
package. The package was checked out and deemed to not be a threat.

An explosion in front of a City Heights apartment complex early Tuesday ignited several small
bushes and damaged a parked car and a fence. Investigators determined the low-explosive device “wasn’t
anything sophisticated".

A written bomb threat forced the Worland Middle School to evacuate, sending students to a
temporary shelter. Local Law Enforcement officers performed a sweep of the building prior to the bomb
sniffing dog’s arrival. The dog and his handler, brought in from Lander, completed the check of the
building . The building was then cleared for re-entry.

A 911 call from an employee at Surfside Seafood reporting a man claiming to have a bomb in
his backpack and was going to set it off. Police officers located the suspect standing in front of the
restaurant next to a backpack and suitcase. The bomb squad determined the suspicious device found
inside a man's backpack was not a bomb. The area has reopened to the public.

Police confirmed a Belford home was safe after an electrical transformer prompted a call to a
state bomb squad. They discovered the transformer, part of a neon light, police said. They called a bomb
squad to confirm the device was safe. Police cleared the area.

New Mexico State University is reporting police have left the scene of a reported suspicious
device on campus. Office Bomb Squad were among the units to respond. The area was declared safe.
 Officials Look Into Bomb Threat Reported At Ventura Courthouse

After a bomb threat prompted a search of the Ventura County courthouse , authorities said
the area was determined to be safe. Deputies and a police dog searched inside and outside the building
but a suspicious device or package was never found.

The Shoshone National Forest remains open to the public Wednesday after a ranger district
office received a bomb threat. Someone called the Wapiti Ranger District "threatening the presence of a
bomb in one of the forest's campgrounds," according to a release from the forest service.

There was a bomb threat and the evictions were all going to be rescheduled. he Endicott
Village Court was evacuated. After checking the surrounding the areas was declared safe.

A FedEx envelope placed through a cracked open window of a Santa Barbara County Sheriff's
cruiser. Sheriff's officials deemed the incident as a possible bomb threat and closed down Camino Corto
from El Colegio Road to Estero Road. The bomb squad was called in to examine the suspicious package
and brought out the department's robot. The package was not a threat.

A childcare center evacuated Wednesday after police found a suspicious suitcase in the
bushes across the street. The bomb squad was responding as a precaution. The bomb squad opened the
suitcase - and found women's clothes inside.

A bomb threat was made against Tupelo High School , prompting the evacuation of staff and
students to the school's parking lots and football stadium. Nothing was found after checking the area.