A hoax pipe bomb has been thrown through the window of a family home in Ballymoney. A
brick was used to smash the front window of the house in Carnany Park some time overnight, before the
device was thrown inside. Police were called and the device was examined by the Army who declared it an
elaborate hoax.

A bomb disposal unit was called out to a supermarket after the discovery of a "suspicious
looking" package. After examining the package the unit deployed a remote controlled robot to examine
the device and it was destroyed in a controlled detonation.

A petrol bomb has been thrown at police in the Ardoyne area of north Belfast. Police said
officers were responding to reports of a suspicious vehicle on Ardoyne Avenue when they were attacked
by a crowd of stone throwers. The officers' vehicle was then struck by a petrol bomb close to Rosapenna
Street. They were not injured and later located the suspicious vehicle and seized it.

A suspicious package which sparked a huge security alert after it was found outside a city
centre arena was a deliberate hoax. The alarm was triggered by a member of staff who discovered the
package outside the 16,000-seat Arena Birmingham. Police moved to evacuate the area and the fire
service was also called to the scene, amid fears it was a bomb.

A package found in a Manchester hotel has been confirmed as "not suspicious". The army and
police officers were this afternoon assessing the package on the fifth floor of the Premier Inn hotel in
Victoria Bridge Street.

A package found in a Manchester hotel has been confirmed as "not suspicious". The army and
police officers were this afternoon assessing the package on the fifth floor of the Premier Inn hotel in
Victoria Bridge Street. The suspicious package at the Premier Inn hotel on Victoria Bridge Street in
Manchester has been confirmed as a non-viable device and not suspicious.

A bomb threat sent to a humanitarian aid charity's offices in Bradford might have had
Islamophobic links. The item contained “upsetting and threatening” material.

Officers executed a warrant on a property in Coventry and discovered items they believed to
be suspicious. The Army's Explosive Ordnance Disposal was called to carry out an examination of the items
declaring false this alarm.

Part of Manchester Airport was evacuated due to concerns over an item passing through
security. The item in question - later confirmed to be a laptop - was ‘passing through security’ and is still
under investigation. The items recovered are under study and the scene was declared safe.

Police had warned residents of suspicious objects left in the area. The item has been declared
an elaborate hoax after a suspicious object was examined by the Army bomb squad.

A man has been arrested after "suspicious items" were discovered at a house, leading to a
bomb disposal team being called out. Police searched the building and requested support from the fire
service and an explosive ordnance disposal team. Police Scotland said the items were removed and there
was no risk to the public.

Bomb-making material and ammunition has been found during a security alert in Lurgan, which
closed part of the railway line. The railway line between Lurgan and Moira had to be closed due to the
discovery of a suspicious object in the Cornakinnegar Road area.