Arkansas police say the U.S. Postal Service and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives were called to investigate a suspicious device found inside a mailbox. Garland County Under
Sheriff Jason Lawrence describes the device as a glass soda bottle filled with black powder and ball
bearings with a material serving as a fuse on top.

Columbus police and the Columbus Division of Fire bomb squad are at a church near
Westerville after a report of a vehicle dumped by the building, possibly with explosives.

Police responded Friday to a Walmart in Renton to investigate a bomb threat. The Walmart is
on Rainier Avenue S. Members of the public were asked to avoid the area. Police said the bomb threat was
received by a Walmart employee on the phone. Police determined that the bomb threat was not credible.

Police say the scene is clear at 50 Penn Place after they investigated a bomb threat.
A manager at Belle Isle Brewery told News 4 that a man came into the bar making troubling statements
late Thursday afternoon. Employees gave the man water and called police after he made a comment
about a bomb being on the second floor of the bar.

A Jordan-Elbridge Central School District student faces charges for claiming he placed a bomb
under one of the district buses. The district then sent the buses back to the bus garage. An investigation
was conducted along with state police K-9 units. No device was found.

Utah State Courts stated just after 5 p.m. that they have received the all clear notice from
police. Utah State Courts confirmed that the sweep of the Ogden courthouse is complete but said a short
time later they expect the courthouse will remain closed for the day. The officials declared the alam false.

Officials cleared the scene of two suspicious packages with the assistance of a tactical robot
Thursday at a shopping plaza parking lot in Santa Fe Springs. The investigation prompted both businesses
to close as the Los Angeles County Sheriff's Bomb Squad sent its robot to clear the scene. The robot
successfully opened both suitcases, which were empty.

Residents planting bushes came across a suspicious device, which prompted the Dayton Bomb
Squad to respond to their home. The device found in the backyard of a Laurelgrove Drive home was
described as a homemade firework buried for possibly a decade.

An errant backpack left on the sidewalk in front of M&T Bank at 201 West State Street
triggered a bomb scare. The woman reported that she saw a grey-colored backpack left unattended on
the sidewalk outside the bank. When Gavin investigated, he saw wires inside the backpack and hanging
outside. He could not immediately recognize the type of wire and treated it as a potentially dangerous
device. Bomb Squad detectives investigated the bag and performed x-rays, but ultimately determined that
it contained a laptop computer and assorted related items.

Normal operations have resumed at MacArthur Airport this weekend following a bomb scare.
Police pulled passengers from a Frontier Airlines flight after they say there was a report of a bomb threat
from an anonymous caller around 4:30 p.m. The threat was directed at flights to West Palm Beach,
Florida.

Chicago police say an unattended backpack was discovered on the bus in the 3700 block of
North Kimball. Police-scanner dispatches indicate a man threw the backpack onto the bus, shouted
something and ran off. The bus was then evacuated. The Unit removed the suspicious item.

According to the Vail Police Department, someone called the Vail Communications Center and
said a condo complex on Garmisch Drive in West Vail had four pressure cooker bombs in it that would be
detonated if a ransom was not paid to the caller. It was quickly determined there was no threat to the
public. A voluntary evacuation alert was sent to those who lived in the condo complex.

A Bradenton man calls the bomb squad for a suspicious package. A man located a suspicious
package in his mailbox. The Bomb Unit determined the package did not contain explosive material.

A suspicious bag prompted the evacuation of a Waterloo postal facility and brought the police
bomb squad over the weekend. After approaching the out-of-place backpack with the squad’s robot and
X-raying it, authorities determined the pack wasn’t dangerous