Six Iraqi soldiers were wounded Sunday after a suicide bomber wearing an explosive belt blew
himself up in Hit district, 70 km west of Ramadi, Anbar. The troops were combing a party headquarters
that was hit by a bomb explosion Saturday, when the suicide bomber targeted them.

Security services have arrested more than twenty Islamic State members in several operations in
Nineveh province, while weapons and explosives were seized in their possession. Troops cordoned off the
area, where the militants were hiding and invaded their houses, then took them to Nineveh Operations
Command headquarters for investigations.

Nine policemen were killed and 31 wounded when a suicide bomber drove a car full of
explosives at their checkpoint west of Baghdad on Monday, as attacks resumed after a period of
uncommon calm. Violence has dropped sharply in Iraq over the past year, but car bombs, roadside bombs
and other attacks remain common.

A bomber has detonated his explosives near a political party’s headquarters in the central Iraqi
city of Hit, killing three people. Five others, including a female candidate for Iraq's upcoming
parliamentary elections scheduled for May 2018, were injured in the incident.

A policeman was killed and another was injured as a bomb blast targeted a local police patrol in
Tal Afar, west of Mosul.

A prominent Islamic State member has been killed in an explosion on the borders between
Diyala and Salahuddin provinces. A mysterious explosion inside a rest house on the outskirts of Mutaibija,
on borders between Diyala and Salahuddin, which left one of the leaders, known as ‘the dwarf’, killed”
Sadiq al-Husseini, head of the security committee of Diyala provincial council.

In related news, security services arrested nine Islamic State members, who were possessing
explosives, in Kojli region.

Iraqi troops found on Thursday a large cache of explosive charges and mortar shells south of
Baghdad. Iraqi troops, as part of ongoing efforts to hunt for Islamic State militants, have found 42
explosive charges and seven mortar shells south of the Iraqi capital,” the Baghdad Operations Command
said in a statement.

At least two people were killed and seven injured Monday in an attack by four suicide bombers
from the extremist Islamic State (IS) group in a town in Iraq's western province of Anbar.

Security media center declared on Tuesday that an ISIS terrorist has been arrested in the
district of Al-Rashidia in Nineveh. Spokesman for the center Brigadier Yehia Rasul said that the forces
arrested the terrorist on receiving accurate intelligence. He also added the forces seized quantities of
explosives in the area. In Baghdad, a terrorist has been arrested in an ambush. Spokesman for Baghdad
Operations Gen. Saad Maan said that the federal police managed to arrest an ISIS terrorist in the district of
Al-Karkh.

Iraq security forces Wednesday killed two suicide bombers who attempted to attack Shiite
pilgrims who were walking in large numbers to the holy Kadhimiyah shrine. Acting on intelligence reports,
the Iraqi forces ambushed two militants wearing explosive belts in Tarmiyah area, some 40 km north of
Baghdad, and opened fire on them, leaving one of the suicide bombers killed and forcing the other to
detonate his explosive belt after wounding him.

A Turkish soldier was killed in an attack by PKK terrorists in northern Iraq. he General Staff said
in a statement that three other soldiers were also wounded in the mortar attack by the PKK in Iraq's Kani
Rash region.

Two suicide bombers were killed as they were attempting to attack visitors of a Shiite shrine,
north of Baghdad. In light of accurate information from intelligence department, a checkpoint was set up
in al-Khadra region in Tarmiyah district, north of Baghdad. The two attackers, wearing explosive belts,
approached a house, where the ambush was there.

Over twenty people were killed, injured in bomb blasts that took place, north of Salahuddin
explosives went off while digging tombs.

Two civilians were injured Wednesday in a car bomb attack in Ramadi city as the country still
suffers from almost daily bombings believed to be launched by the Islamic State group. An explosive
charge fixed into a car went off near a branch of Rafidain Bank in Ramadi.