The bomb squad and the fire marshal's office are investigating after police say someone threw
some type of incendiary device inside a Philadelphia Chinese takeout restaurant. Authorities tell Action
News that the business was open when someone threw some type of incendiary device inside of the
store. Responding police and fire units determined there was no fire.

The Minneapolis Police Department's Bomb Squad was called to check out an unattended
backpack outside the Hennepin County Jail. The situation was cleared after officers discovered the
backpack contained "standard backpack items.

The Garrett County Courthouse was evacuated this morning, and remains closed to the public
after an envelope containing an unknown white power was opened. News has learned that a handwritten
note containing the words: "Praise Allah" accompanied the letter. A hazardous materials team from
Somerset County has determine the white powder to be harmless.

A bomb threat was called in to a business at 37th Avenue and Lower Buckeye Road. According
to Phoenix FD, an officer that responded to the scene found what looks like a device attached to what
appears to be a parachute. That officer touched the parachute and got some kind of white powder on
himself.

The Publix on the south side of Dothan beside Tropical Smoothie was forced to close its doors
this morning due to a bomb threat. Dothan police as well as a K-9 bomb dog walked through the building
to make sure there wasn't an explosive device inside.

A suspicious package left at a Hyde Park business caused an active law enforcement scene. The
Cincinnati Fire Department's Hazardous Device Disposal Unit an the Hamilton County Sheriff's Office K-9
Unit investigated the material in the package and determined that it did not pose a threat.

Police dicovered an IED inside of a house and they proceeded to a detention over a suspect.
After detecting it was put in a safety area and according to remote technic the EOD unit proceeded to
deactivate the appliance.

Red Dot gun powder has been identified by Dayton Bomb Squad members as the substance in
the bottle bomb found. Alliant Red Dot gun powder is the brand name for a smokeless powder used
primarily for light and standard 12 gauge target loads, but can be used in some handgun loads.

The Lake Worth Bridge is back open after deputies deemed a suspicious package not
dangerous. East and westbound lanes of the bridge were closed during the investigation.

Officers were investigating a suspicious package outside a Miami Police station. The package
was left in front of the station at 400 Northwest 2nd Avenue. A bomb squad was en route to investigate.
Police later determined that the suspcious luggage was deemed safe by the bomb squad.

The Charleston County Bomb Squad has cleared a suspicious package that was found outside a
restaurant near Tanger Outlet. The package was a suitcase with clothes and phone chargers. Police have
since cleared the scene.

Roads were closed and there was a heavy police presence at the Drumcastle Center on York
Road after a bomb threat. Baltimore County Police said a call came a person making threats. Following the
threat, the building was evacuated and after inspectioning the area police gave the all clear for workers.

A building in Baltimore County was been evacuated after a bomb threat was called in Thursday
morning. Police searched the building and did not find anything and the scene has been cleared.

A bomb threat came into the U.S. Bank in Weston. Everest Metro Police Chief Clayton Schulz
says they received a 911 call from someone at the bank saying they received a call from an unknown
number saying there was a bomb in the building.

The Henrico County Police Department says no threat was found after the discovery of a
suspicious package. Police and fire crews were called to the 6600 block of W. Broad Street after the
package was found. Two people at the scene reported medical concerns possibly associated with the
package, which was determined to be non-hazardous. The building was evacuated for a short time as
police and firefighters investigated.