Terrorists were apprehended in Kurram Agency in an Intelligence-based operation (IBO) carried
out by security forces along with intelligence agency on Tuesday, Inter-Services Public Relations (ISPR) said
in a statement. Huge quantity of arms and ammunition, explosives, bombs, IEDs and landmines were
recovered from an underground dugout.

A man was killed as his vehicle hit a landmine near Goth Noora Khan in the jurisdiction of
Malghozad police station in Dera Bugti on Monday. According to police, the deceased had been identified
as Mohammad Safi, resident of Jaffarabad. Police have registered a case and started investigation.

Operation Radd-ul-Fasaad continues across the country successfully as security forces
apprehended six terrorists during operations in different areas of Balochistan. Cache of arms and
ammunition including explosives, detonators, rockets, mines and IEDs were also recovered from the
arrested terrorists.

A terrorism attack was foiled by the law enforcement agencies in Pakistan's capital city of
Islamabad and two suicide jackets along with arms and ammunition were recovered. According to local
police officials, two explosives-laden jackets and arms were found from the capital's Golra area in the G-14
sector neighborhood, adding that the recovered arms and ammunition included hand grenades, ball
bearings, pistols and bullets.

At least three FC personnel were injured on Sunday when a remote-controlled bomb exploded
near their vehicle at a checkpost in Bannu district of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP). According to security
sources, the security vehicle was targeted near the Mir Ali checkpost in Bannu by a remote-controlled
bomb, damaging the vehicle. The injured personnel were later shifted to Cantonment Military Hospital for
treatment.

According to source, the CTD conducted an operation after receiving information and arrested
3 terrorists from the banned Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) from Nabi Pura Area in Sheikhupura. The
forces have recovered IED (Improvised Explosive Device) and detonators among other explosives from the
arrested terrorists. A case has also been registered against the three.

Three minors were injured after a remote-controlled bomb exploded in Dera Bugti. Security
forces cordoned off the area after the explosion. The bomb was installed on a road near Pathar Nala.

A Pakistan Army soldier, Lance Havaldar Irfan Ali embraced martyrdom while defusing an
improvised explosive device (IED). The Pakistan Army engineer’s team had located the device that was
planted near Datta Khel during a routine scanning. His body has been sent to his hometown where his
funeral will take place.

The law enforcement agencies seized eight improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and other
equipment used in subversive activities from Chotta Nehr area of Tehsil Jamrud. The security forces
conducted raid on a tipoff and found the explosives concealed in plastic bags at a deserted locality.
According to an official of the security forces, unidentified militants might have hidden the explosives to
target military or civilian installations.