The Shreveport Fire Department Bomb Squad responded to 5300 block of Bienville Street after
a resident reported finding a suspicious device. Barksdale DOD unit concluded the device was an old non
explosive training round and rendered the device safe. Barksdale DOD took possession of the device and
transported it back to the air base.

According to Department of Administration officials, a letter was received by the Dane County
Court from an inmate in the Wisconsin prison system. That letter indicated there was a bomb threat to
Governor Scott Walker’s office. Capitol police were notified. Shortly K-9 units searched the area and
Capitol police found no threat — and the scene was cleared.

A Holyoke, Massachusetts man was arrested and charged after police responded to his home
for report of explosives. An a search of the residence, officers located several chemical components, to
include 25-50 pounds of Ammonium Nitrate, and various materials consistent with manufacturing
explosives. As investigators continued to search the home, they found 17 weapons, including a fully
automatic rifle, and a large amount of ammunition. Authorities removed those from the house.

Fire investigators are seeking a suspect who they say threw a Molotov cocktail at a window of a
building at 196 Nursery St. Dennis Leger, aide to Springfield Fire Commissioner Bernard Calvi, said the
incendiary device was thrown at a second-story window, but failed to break the glass. No injuries were
reported.

Officials with the Charleston Police Department say that the threat is unfounded. No injuries
have been reported and units are clearing the scene.

Township police have arrested a 15-year-old Butler student, after the boy made what
investigators say was a “noncredible” bomb threat Wednesday afternoon at the intermediate high school.

A man was taken into custody at Atwood Memorial Center Wednesday in connection to bomb
threats made referencing St. Cloud City Hall. Police searched city hall, finding a bag belonging to the
suspect outside city hall. A police dog was brought in, and no explosives were found.

An investigation is underway after police found a pipe bomb near a railroad in Ballston Spa.
Police say Canadian Pacific Railroad Police reported that their track maintenance personnel found a threefoot piece of PVC with wires protruding from one end. The suspicious device was found in the area of the
railroad tracks at Zepko Lane near the Zim Smith Trail in Ballston Spa. The device was sent for further
analysis to the FBI Lab in Quantico, Virginia.

The Chatham County Police Department says they found explosive materials in a home
Wednesday night after responding to a call at a Georgetown apartment complex. Items were also found in
the residence that led police to request the U. S. Army’s Explosive Ordinance Disposal team for support.

After being retrieved by the Tampa Police Bomb Squad's robot, police say a suspicious package
found outside Carver Exceptional Center, contained nothing dangerous.

Authorities have closed a gate and tightened security measures at an Air Force base near
Omaha after a military dog alerted its handler to the presence of explosives.

The commercial gate at Vance Air Force Base was closed for more than five hours due to a
bomb scare.

According to Ogden police, the threat was not specific enough as to which courthouse was
being threatened, only that it was directed toward Weber County Courts. Both Ogden District and Justice
courts.

Rockford Police were called to the corner of Buckbee Street and Barnes Street this morning for
the report of a possible car explosion. The bomb squad was called to the scene to determine if an
explosive device was used. A black Pontiac has been identified as the car involved. Witnesses say they
heard a loud boom. There were no reported injuries.

Police have deemed a suspicious package left on a Midtown Manhattan street to be safe. The
NYPD bomb squad was called in to investigate the package on East 42nd Street and Madison Avenue late
Thursday afternoon, the spokesman said. The spokesman did not confirm the contents of the package, but
said it was "nothing that could harm anybody.