Three labourers were killed in a landmine blast near Mundibedha village under the Raighar
police limits in Nabarangpur district. The labourers while returning home by a tractor after completing
their work saw near the roadside of Venus village a suspicious piece of rag tied in a branch of a tree. The
trio got down of the vehicle to check the rag. And suddenly, the landmine exploded killing then on the
spot.

An official said that Abdul Ghani, son of Muhammad Sikandar, a resident of Karmara, sustained
serious injuries during the IED explosion which took place while he was grazing sheep in the area.

An outlaw was seriously injured when a bomb exploded while he was assembling it under
Mojahidpur police station area in this district. Police said here that the criminal Sujit Das (32) sustained
serious injuries when the bomb exploded while he was assembling it at a house in Kajichak locality.
Sources said that a live bomb was recovered from the spot.

After an anonymous bomb threat to the Periyar University at Karuppur on the Salem –
Bengaluru National Highway, sleuths from the Bomb Detection and Disposal Squad (BDDS) of the city
police carried out intense search operations here on Tuesday. The call turned out to be a hoax.

The Maoist rebels blew up the low-level culvert by detonating explosive material on the
cement concrete road between Pedamidisileru and Taliperu in the Telangana’s tribal heartland. The Charla
police unearthed three land mines allegedly planted by Maoists targeting the security personnel on the
outskirts of Tippapur a border village in Charla.

Maoists blasted a small causeway across Pagidi Vagu rivulet in Cherla police limits in Bhadradri
Kothagudem district. A team of Maoists were stated to have used buckets filled with gelatin to blast the
causeway as part of the protest called by the Dhadakaranya Special Zonal Committee and Telangana State
Committee.

Police carried out extensive search of a private hospital here after a hoax call about bomb
planted in the hospital. According to Nayati Medicity hospital, the police was informed that one Sanjai
Bhargava threatened hospital security manager Amit Singh on his mobile phone. Nothing was found.

Unidentified people allegedly hurled a petrol bomb close to the entrance of the Sterlite copper
plant. Company sources said that nobody was injured in the incident which they blamed on anti-Sterlite
protesters who in turn termed it a drama staged by the company.

Militants on Thursday night lobbed a grenade at a police station in south Kashmir’s Kulgam
district, leaving two special police officers (SPOs) and a civilian injured.

Alertness of passengers and timely step by railway police averted a major mishap at
Jharsuguda Railway Station this morning after a huge cache of explosives were recovered from the
Dhanbad-Alappuzha Express.

Eight Naxals were killed in an encounter with the security forces in Bijapur district of
Chhattisgarh. A huge cache of arms including One Self Loading Rifle, one .303 rifle, six rocket launchers
and three grenades have been recovered. It was not immediately known when the encounter took place.

The East Garo Hills district police have recovered huge cache of arms and bomb making items
from different locations in Meghalaya's hills district. Security personnel have recovered one 7.62 Machine
gun, one 7.62 SLR Assault Rifle, one DBBL, one DBBL barrel, eight wireless sets, thirteen wireless set
batteries, five primed IED'S in plastic containers, six twelve volts batteries for IED, five circuits for RC
IED.

East Garo Hills district Superintendent of Police said that after searching for several days, the
police search team recovered huge cache of arms and bomb making items from different locations of
Rongbokgre and Dorengkigre village areas. The recovered arms belonged to the banned outfit Garo
National Liberation Army (GNLA).

The Maoists continue to claim their presence in tribal dominated areas of Malkangiri, Koraput
and other districts in Odisha. The rebels today exploded a landmine at Kaliajhola forest in Koraput district.
Though the extremists planted the explosive targeting the BSF jawans, no one from the security forces was
injured in the blast.