Boulder police taped off the U.S. Bank at Broadway and North while examining a suspicious
package on Friday evening that later turned out to be a suitcase full of clothes and toiletries. Boulder
dispatch confirmed that police had cleared the scene.

Shoppers were forced to evacuate Wal-Mart at The Highlands on Friday as law enforcement
evaluated a suspicious package discovered in the parking lot. The item was later discovered to be a Sentry
safe, which can be purchased at Wal-Mart stores. An X-ray examination by a bomb squad from Pittsburgh
revealed the safe was empty.

The Lincoln fire department says all is clear after an Amtrak train was evacuated near Lincoln
Friday morning when a suspicious package was found on the train. Authorities say a bomb sniffing dog did
not find any explosives.

University of Akron police are investigating a bomb threat called in Friday morning to a
building on campus. Investigators took bomb-sniffing dogs through the Polsky Building after someone
called in the threat.

A bomb squad rushed to a trail on Kalamazoo's east side after someone out walking called to
report finding an explosive device. Kalamazoo Department of Public Safety and bomb technicians acted
quickly, when they got a call about what looked like an explosive device. Police said they didn’t want to
take any chances. It was a homemade object,” Kalamazoo police Lt. Michael Kelley said. They’re items you
can go out and purchase at the store, but somebody took some time and crafted it and made it. I guess
you could call it like a booby-trap type of device. Kelley said bomb technicians determined it was not an
explosive device but could have caused harm.

A bomb squad destroyed a device in front of the Whittier Planned Parenthood office
Saturday, eventually determining it as a non-explosive, "hoax device." The clinic was evacuated while the
bomb squad destroyed the device. The package was described as a "pipe with visible wires.

A fake bomb was planted in front of a Planned Parenthood clinic in Whittier. Bomb squad
was called to the 7600 block , on a report of a suspicious item that appeared to be a pipe with wires
sticking out. Officers used a robot to examine and blow up the object. They determined it was a hoax
device.

A bomb squad rushed to a trail on Kalamazoo's east side after someone out walking called to
report finding an explosive device. Bomb technicians acted quickly, when they got a call about what
looked like an explosive device.

A suspicious package prompted a large police investigation in the 2100 block of Inwood Drive.
An U.S. postman called 911 after seeing a cardboard box on top of a mailbox without an address. Police
confirmed the box was found to be empty.

The Atlanta Police Bomb Squad has been called out for a suspicious package located near the
intersection of Wylie Street and Flat Shoals Avenue in the Reynoldstown area of southeast Atlanta. Atlanta
Police and Fire crews are on the scene as part of the investigation. A witness on the scene says an
aluminum package with wires trailing from it was ticking, and that was when they called the police.

The Red Lake County Sheriff received a report Sunday afternoon that some bomb making
materials were found near a hunting cabin in Equality Township, northeast of Oklee. Once on the scene
they found what appeared to be pipe bombs, in a container, hidden in rubble on the complainant’s
property. It did not appear the bombs were placed there to be detonated, instead someone likely put
them there to store or hide them.

A pressure cooker left in a trash can Monday at Los Angeles International Airport prompted
an evacuation of the Tom Bradley International Terminal. Airport police found the cooking item, which can
be used to make an improvised explosive, about noon, and called in a bomb squad soon after.

Bomb squad officers from the Washington State Patrol and the Pierce County Sheriff’s Office
arrived at the Capitol Campus just after 12:30 p.m. Monday to assess an abandoned piece of luggage. Jay
Inslee’s office early Monday afternoon, dropped off a piece of luggage she said was intended for the
governor, and ran out of the building. Finally the content of this lugagge was a laptop.

A "suspicious package" that turned out to be a medical equipment shipment forced Mercy
Medical Center to close an entrance to the hospital. Bomb Squad responded to the scene, and while
authorities restricted the use of the entrance, an evacuation was not ordered. Authorities determined the
box was a medical equipment shipment that was left in the wrong place.

Bloomfield engine brake manufacturer was evacuated early Monday because of a bomb
threat, police said. Someone called Jacobs Vehicles Systems, and said bombs would be going off in the
building within the hour. The company called police, and the building was evacuated. Nothing was found
after inspection.

An area of downtown Monticello was closed off Tuesday morning after a suspicious package
was discovered on the front steps of the post office. The bomb squad careflly investigated the scene and
eventually opened the package, a green tote, discovering it was empty.

Early this morning, district officials were made aware of an item on a prank website about a
possible threat at Start High School. TPS Security and Toledo Police worked together to investigate the
matter. No evidence was found to show the item was credible but, as a precaution, extra security was
dispatched to the high school.

NYPD Harbor units responded to bomb threat made to the Statue of Liberty Wednesday
morning that was later deemed to be a hoax. NYPD Harbor Patrol units responded and found no
explosives there. The site was not open to the public at the time.

An Accomack County high school was evacuated Wednesday after a bomb threat. The school
was immediately evacuated and authorities were called in to investigation. No bomb was found during
searches.

Union City police have detained a person after a bomb threat was reported at the
department and city hall. Both buildings were temporarily evacuated as a precaution. Police say a man
went into city hall and made a bomb threat. Then, he apparently left a back pack on the floor before
leaving the building. After searching process carried out by bomb no bomb was found.

Maricopa County's 4th Avenue Jail was placed on lockdown following a bomb threat that has
since been unfound. The Sheriff's Office said all non-essential facility personnel was evacuated. Police say they discovered information that led to a man who showed signs of mental health issues. According to
police, no real threat actually existed.

Investigators have discovered a homemade bomb at the home of one of the two Georgia
teens suspected in threats against a Woodstock high school. A homemade incendiary device has been
idendified and after that a 17-year-old suspectswas arrested.

The bomb squad has been called to Highland Park police headquarters after a squad car
brought one in from the field. Officials say the bomb was found and called into the police department. It
was then transported to the station by a squad car. It's unclear what type of explosive the bomb is made
up of.

The Orlando Fire Department's Arson and Bomb Squad investigated a suspicious suitcase
near the 4100 block of Conroy Road in Southwest Orlando. The suitcase was deemed not hazardous.

The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms along with a bomb squad have cordoned off a
large section of 6th Avenue in Dothan. Investigators worked through the night to identify a suspicious
package at the Medical Center Terrace Apartments. A vehicle was searched at the Southeast Alabama
Medical Center but investigators found nothing.

A hotel near Winter Park reopened Friday after officials evacuated the building to investigate
a strange smell coming from a room.A bomb squad was on scene about 10:40 a.m. investigating the room.
Inside, they found some wires and ammunition, but nothing illegal.