three Taliban mine planters were killed by own explosives while they were planting it in a
roadside in Paktika last night. MoI in a statement said that the incident took place in Gudal region, Mata
Khan District of Paktika province, while Taliban planned to plant a roadside mine.

A blast from explosives placed on a motorbike killed at least six people, including four children,
and wounded nine other children in Herat province in western Afghanistan, a government official said.
The explosion happened near a mosque in Shindand district, said Jilani Farhad.

The Afghan National Police (ANP) forces have thwarted three back to back explosions in
different parts of the capital as part of their ongoing efforts to foil the destructive plots being hatched by
the anti-government armed elements. The Kabul Criminal Investigation Department (CID) officials said the
explosions were thwarted in Qarabagh district, 5th and 6th police districts of the city. The officials further
added that security forces discovered an improvised explosive planted under a culvert in Qarabagh
district.

Four Daesh - or so-called Islamic state (IS) -rebels, including a key commander, have been killed
by their own bomb in the Chapa Dara district of eastern Kunar province. Daesh militants, including a
commander named Musafar, were killed when one of the landmines they were planting went off
prematurely.

A roadside bomb exploded in Afghanistan's central Ghor province on Wednesday, injuring at
least three people including provincial director of agriculture. The agriculture personnel were from a
Dulaina district where they inspected agriculture projects. Medics said that the injured in stable condition.

Dozens of shops were damaged when a magnetic bomb hit a fuel tanker in front of the Bagram
airbase in central Parwan province. he shops caught fire after the explosion of the sticky bomb attached to
the oil tanker, Farhad Hashimi, crime branch chief at the police headquarters. He said the tanker belonged
to a firm supplying fuel to foreign troops stationed on the biggest US base in Afghanistan. Residents of the
area said the blaze was extinguished after two hours by firefighters. The Taliban claimed responsibility for
the bomb attack.

A bomb blast took place near a peace advocacy tent in the capital of southeastern Khost
province on Thursday, but caused no casualties. Acting provincial police chief Col. Abdul Hanan Zadran
told Pajhwok Afghan News that the explosive device had been placed in a flower pot that went off at
around 12pm this afternoon, but no one was hurt.

A total of nine militants were killed and five others injured after an explosive device exploded
prematurely in a Taliban commander's house in northern Baghlan province. A group of Taliban militants,
according to the official, were busy in making mine at the house of Taliban commander Gul Ahmad in
Dand-e-Shahabudin area outside provincial capital Pul-e-Khumri on Friday when the device exploded
suddenly killing nine militants on the spot and injuring five others.

At least nine militants have been killed and five others wounded after an explosive device
exploded prematurely in a Taliban commander's house in Afghanistan's Dand-e-Shahabuddin area of
Baghlan province. Acording to the report, the anti-government armed militant groups often use explosive
materials for the roadside and car bombings to target the government staff and security personnel.

Taliban insurgents have blown up a power pylon supplying electricity from Uzbekistan to
Afghanistan in northern Baghlan province. The militants destroyed the pylon by blowing it up with a bomb
in Doshi district.

The Taliban militants have blown up the laboratory of a school in eastern Nangarhar province
of Afghanistan which resulted into the destruction of the laboratory as well as some documents stored in
the compound. The statement further added that all the equipment and documents available in the
laboratory were totally destroyed in the explosion.

The Afghan security forces have thwarted a plot by the anti-government armed militant groups
to detonate an improvised explosive device in Kabul city. The Criminal Investigation Department (CID)
officials said a remote-controllied improvised explosive device was discovered from the 5th police district
of the city before the militants manage to detonate it.

An Afghan security force member inspects the site of a blast in Kandahar city, capital of
Kandahar province, Afghanistan. A senior police official was killed and three policemen were wounded in a
bomb attack in Kandahar city, capital of Afghanistan's southern province of Kandahar. No group has
claimed responsibility for the latest targeted attack.

At least thirty loyalists of ISIS terrorist group were killed by Afghan Special Forces in vicinity of
eastern Nangarhar province. According to another report, Afghan security forces by discovering and
confiscating 4 round of different type of mines succeeded to prevent from a series of blast incidents in
Nangarhar province. Also during this period, a weapon storage belonging terrorist group have been seized
by Afghan security troops in relevant areas of Jalalabad city the provincial capital of the province. Several
heavy and light weapons have been seized from the weapon storage.