Police seized large number detonators and gelatin sticks from a suspected Maoist in Karpoori
Nagar locality near Ektara village under Govindpur police station area. Police said, 17 detonators and three
gelatin sticks were recovered from the residence of suspected Maoist following a specific intelligence
input. Sources said the suspected Maoist was arrested from the spot.

Unknown miscreant (s) hurled a petrol bomb inside the compound of one Gobind Upadhyay of
Gorkha Samshan Ghat, Barapathar. The vehicle was parked on the roadside. However, no casualty was
reported and the matter is under investigation.

A petrol bomb was hurled at the South Post Office here by miscreants. A worker, who came to
clean the office premises, noticed the broken bottle pieces and informed the police.No damage was
caused in the incident.

Huge cache of explosives and Maoist articles were seized following a heavy exchange of fire
between police and the red rebels after security forces raided the Maoist camp located in Lunga forest
under Mahulapada police limits in the district. Several Maoist articles including kit bags, explosives, rifles
and live bullets were seized from the camp following the encounter.

The Jammu and Kashmir Police said on Saturday that it arrested two over-ground workers of
Zakir Musa led Ansar Ghazwat-ul-Hind in south Kashmir's Pulwama district, recovering cash and a hand
grenade from them.

A bomb was on Saturday night recovered from an under-construction metro tunnel in Kolkata in
West Bengal. The bomb was reportedly recovered from Subhas Sarovar under-construction metro tunnel.
Bomb disposal squad and senior police officials rushed to the spot after receiving the information.
Following this, they removed the bomb from the site.

Four persons were injured in a bomb blast near a power station at Thoubal Khunou in Thoubal
district of Manipur. The IED blast, occurred near the gate of a mega power sub-station was suspected to
have triggered by unknown people and could be related to monetary demands.

Two rowdies hurled country bombs at a canteen functioning inside a local bar, after the person
running the canteen refused to give them money on Sunday in the Union territory. Police said the two
rowdies, identified as Dina, of Koliyanur and Sugu, of L R Palayam, have been attempting to extort money
from the person running a canteen inside a bar at Thirubhuvanai, on the outskirts of the town, on several
occasions. The duo warned the owner of dire consequences if he failed to give them money whenever
they demanded.

An unclaimed gunny bag triggered bomb scare at Swami Vivekanand Airport Mana, Raipur, on
Sunday afternoon. The bag was found in a lawn of the park in the Airport premise. However, later it was
found a pure hoax and that the gunny bag was found containing only cow dung.

Naxals targeted a bus ferrying nearly 30 jawans with an improvised explosive device (IED) in
Chhattisgarh's Bijapur, leaving two of them dead and five injured. The IED effects impacted against the Bus
left side provoking material damages on it and numerous injured.

A crude bomb exploded close to the Dum Dum Cantonment railway station near here this
morning, injuring one person. Police have found many such crude bombs in a nearby hut.

Three country-made bombs were reportedly hurled at DMK’s Ward 26 party office at Kamban
Nagar in Parasurampatti here on Monday. However, none of the bombs exploded. The police were
interrogating one Shanmugavel (42), a farmer, who claimed to have seen a tall youth, sporting blue shirt
and a white cap, hurling the bombs at the party office.

A jawan of District Voluntary Force (DVF) died in a landmine explosion triggered by Maoists near
Sakata village under Munikhol panchayat within Muniguda police limits here on Monday evening. The
incident occurred when a team of DVF was returning to their base camp after combing operation in the
Niyamgiri hills. Sources said security forces are yet to reach the explosion site due to darkness.

A low-intensity crude bomb exploded on railway tracks near Pollachi station in Coimbatore on
Wednesday while a Madurai-Coimbatore train was passing by, spreading panic among passengers, police
said. The train was immediately stopped, they said, adding that there was no damage to life or property