Morocco’s anti-terror bureau have dismantled a terrorist cell in the city of Fez. Two
individuals suspected of having links with the terrorist organization ISIS, have been arrested. The
Moroccan security elements seized guns, hunting guns, explosives material, blades, communication
equipments and a large sum of cash money.

The Moroccan police have arrested four people with suspected links to the Islamic State (IS)
in the northern city of Fez. The ministry said in a statement that the arrested were planning attacks in this
tourist destination and spiritual center.
This operation comes less than two weeks after security services arrested 11 people in the city and seized
chemical materials used for making bombs.

Five people were killed in a suicide bomb attack when Boko Haram raided a remote village in
northeast Nigeria, a civilian militia member and the emergency services. When the attacker got closer, he
detonated the explosives wrapped around his body, killing four CJTF and wounding two others.

he incident occurred when the suicide bombers who had the IED vest strapped on
detonated the IEDs on their bodies, killing themselves and damaging the pedestrian gate. Another suicide
bomber detonated an IED in a bush near Umalari village.

Three female suicide bombers killed 13 people and wounded 16 in the northeastern city of
Maiduguri. The first bomber detonated her explosive belt around 9:45pm (2045 GMT) in front of a small
restaurant in the capital of Borno state "when people were buying their dinner. The two other bombers ollowed minutes later, resulting in the injured, an armed militia leader said, noting that the attack came
"hours after reports of sighting of a lot of Boko Haram members outside the city. There was no immediate
claim of responsibility for the attack.

Three female suicide bombers killed 13 people and wounded 16 in the northeastern city of
Maiduguri. The first bomber detonated her explosive belt around 9:45pm (2045 GMT) in front of a small
restaurant in the capital of Borno state "when people were buying their dinner," a military source said on
condition of anonymity, giving the death toll. The two other bombers followed minutes later, resulting in
the injured, an armed militia leader said, noting that the attack came "hours after reports of sighting of a
lot of Boko Haram members outside the city." There was no immediate claim of responsibility for the
attack.

The Nigerian Army on Wednesday said its troops had killed 11 Boko Haram insurgents and
destroyed a bomb making factory at Ngala Local Government Area of Bono. He disclosed that the troops
destroyed the insurgents’ logistics base and a workshop at Ngaiwa village and an Improvised Explosive
Device, IED making factory at Tongul.

The Nigerian Army on Wednesday said its troops had killed 11 Boko Haram insurgents and
destroyed a bomb-making factory at Ngala Local Government Area of Bono. He disclosed that the troops
destroyed the insurgents’ logistics base and a workshop at Ngaiwa village and an Improvised Explosive
Device (IED) making factory at Tongul. the troops also recovered a gun truck; four suicide bomb vests,
various IED making materials, three Dane gun, one Barretta pistol, 22 rounds of 7.62mm ammunition, 5
motorcycles, 13 bicycles and a wheelbarrow.

THE Nigerian Army, yesterday, said the efforts of the 8 Division to enhance troops
responsiveness and domination of its area of responsibility paid off on Friday, as soldiers of 242 Battalion
intercepted a Boko Haram suicide bomb squad at Ngalle village, northern Borno State. One of the terrorists was shot dead, while others fled into the bush. The gallant troops recovered an AK-47 rifle with
a magazine loaded with19 rounds of 7.62mm ammunition, 3 mobile phones, a SIM card and jewelries

The Police in Borno on Sunday said two female suicide bombers were killed while trying to
sneak into Maiduguri metropolis. One of the suicide bombers detonated an Improvised Explosive Device
(IEDs) strapped to her body and killed herself, while the other bomber was gunned down by security
operatives before she detonated the bomb concealed to her body.

A blast has occurred at Muna garage, in Maiduguri, the Borno State capital. Residents of the
community woke up on Wednesday morning to a loud bang which turned out to be an Improvised
Explosive Device, (IED) leaving many injured.

At least five people were killed on Monday when a suicide bomber blew himself up inside a
mosque in northeastern Nigeria, a militia member assisting the military against Boko Haram jihadists said.

A roadside bomb has ripped through a military convoy carrying African Union forces in the
Somali capital, Mogadishu. One armoured personnel carrier was reported to have been damaged after
running over a remote-controlled landmine bomb at SOS area in Heliwa district. No group has yet claimed
responsibility for the IED blast on AMISOM.

At least two civilians were killed, and several others wounded in a remote-controlled landmine
blast near Jowhar town. The explosion has resulted from an explosive device hidden in a water container
left on the banks of a river at Munkay area. No group has so far claimed to credit of the blast, and the
target still remains unclear.