Catholic Elementary School in Dundas has been evacuated after a suspicious package was
found on the school premises. Police have blocked off Alma St. between Sydenham St. and Parkside Ave.
and are asking the public to please stay out of the area.

Two suspicious packages that forced police to evacuate a section of downtown Trois-Rivières,
are harmless. A p squad was dispatched to the city , a suitcase left at the side of a busy downtown street
and a gym bag left in the bathroom of a nearby building. After the inspection the content of both
containes were one contained plumbing equipment and the other IT material.

Toronto Police have arrested a male suspected of leaving a suspicious package near the main
entrance of police headquarters. No one was allowed to enter or exit the building, while the Chemical,
Biological, Radiological, Nuclear, Explosive (CBRNE) team investigated. The package was later detonated.
The area was render in safe.

A prank gone wrong resulted in a significant police response and the evacuation of a big-box
store. They cordoned off the area. The store was evacuated. The suspicious package, which resembled an
explosive device, turned out to be a mock-up that was intended as a joke.

Classes at Nanaimo District Secondary School were disrupted after a bomb threat was made
in graffiti. According officials when the grafitti was discoveredthe school was then evacuated . Thre is not
additional info to clarify details about even thought it was a low-level threat.

Police are again on scene at a possible bomb threat at the Servus Credit Union on 8 Street
NW. The area being evacuated, and Medicine Hat police are asking people to avoid the area. Police last
week investigated and disposed of a suspicious item at the same business. In that instance the package
was destroyed on scene by the Explosive Disposal Unit and was determined to be an unsophisticated
mock explosive device.

With information provided by an inhabitant of the rural area of the municipality La
Montañita, in the department of Caquetá, the non-technical team of the Battalion of Engineers of
Humanitarian Demining No. 1, found an improvised explosive device that apparently had been planted
near a school. The mine clearers identified a 40-pound gas cylinder that contained an explosive, which,
according to what was narrated by the inhabitants, had been abandoned by organized armed groups who
use this type of explosive devices.

Authorities in north-central Mexico say they are investigating four men found carrying a
drone equipped with a powerful bomb and a remote-controlled detonator. Prosecutor Carlos Zamarripa
says the drone had "a big explosive charge." An assault rifle was also found in the vehicle. It was unclear
where the men planned to detonate the drone.

Military personnel found multiple explosive devices inside an East El Paso apartment complex.
Residents inside one part of the complex were evacuated while the bomb squad investigated.

The Ridgeview campus was evacuated and dismissed due to a new threat to the campus. Law
enforcement is currently on scene as we have been all day and are conducting searches once again of the
area. No explosive device or weapon was found in a thorough search .

A high school in the Midlands region of South Carolina was evacuated this week after a
“suspicious bag” was found in a trash can on campus. The “suspicious bag” was later identified by law
enforcement as an insulin pump power pack.

An anonymous call to 911 said there was a bomb in Mark Twain High School. The Center Police
Department then contacted school officials, who evacuated the high school. The trheat was considered
false.

City Hall was evacuated for around 50 minutes Tuesday morning after officials recieved a
package with suspicious labeling and no return address. The package turned out to be filled with random
papers.

A church in Micanopy was apparently targeted by someone who planted a "suspicious device"
there. No explosives had been found. But, suspicious items were located and collected by forensics.