A security official was martyred while defusing a bomb and two terrorists associated with the
banned outfit TTP were apprehended in North Waziristan and Bannu district. An official of bomb disposal
squad Mazhar lost his life as the explosive device he was trying to neutralise exploded in tehsil Datta Khel
in North Waziristan Agency.

A security official was martyred and three others injured when a bomb disposal unit of Pakistan
Army was targeted by an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) in North Waziristan.

Five security personnel sustained injuries in a remote controlled bomb blast in Daraban area in
the district. Miscreants had planted an explosive device on a roadside in Zarkani village to target the
security forces. The sources said the bomb exploded when a vehicle of security forces was passing through
the area.

At least seven Balochistan Constabulary personnel were martyred and 15 others, including
eight Frontier Corps (FC) soldiers, got injured on Tuesday when three suicide bombers blew themselves up
in Quetta in quick succession.

Security forces arrested two suicide bombers from Lakki Marwat. Suicide jackets and
communication equipment were recovered from the suicide bombers– Naimutullah and Siddiqueullah–
who came from across the border and were tracked down by intelligence agencies.

Three persons, including a cop, sustained injuries when unidentified persons threw a handgrenade on a police checkpost outside Commerce College.

At least three people were killed and 30 others injured on Friday by an improvised explosive
device (IED) blast at a wedding ceremony in northwestern Pakistan, near its border with Afghanistan.

A Counter-Terrorism Department (CTD) team arrested two suspected terrorists and recovered
explosives from their possession. They were reportedly planning an attack on a religious place on the eve
of Shab-e-Barat in Sialkot. The team raided the place and arrested terrorists identified as Wajahat and
Sajjad. Two improvised explosive devices were recovered from them.

An explosive device was placed and detonated near Karni, and may have caused Palestinian
casualties. A kite bomb with a Molotov cocktail attached was attempted to be sent into Israeli territory,
but ended up landing within Gaza. This is in addition to several attempts by the over 10,000 protesters
throughout the last hour to breach the border between Israel and Gaza and sabotage security
infrastructure. The IDF continues to use riot dispersal methods as means to control the uprisings.

A man was wounded in a grenade explosion in Pikit, North Cotabato before dawn. Esmael
Guialel was taken to a hospital for treatment by responding barangay officials and police personnel.
Witnesses said a motorcycle-riding man hurled the grenade at the house of the victim.

Two people were arrested after they allegedly tried to bomb a barangay outpost in Shariff Aguak
in Maguindanao province. According to the report, members of the Barangay Peacekeeping Action Team
(BPAT) spotted four men planting an improvised explosive device (IED) at a ticket booth beside the BPAT
outpost. The IED, which was later defused by the Army’s Explosive and Ordnance Division (EOD), was
placed inside a small box.

A female street vendor was hurt in a bomb explosion in Cotabato City. Joint Task Force Central,
said the bomb exploded on a flyover at Purok Dapdap. Police have yet to determine who placed and
detonated the bomb on the flyover.

Communist insurgents ambushed a military truck transporting soldiers sparking a firefight in
North Cotabato’s Magpet town in southern Philippines. The soldiers were heading to downtown Magpet
when New People’s Army rebels detonated a roadside bomb and strafed the truck. Troops engaged the
ambushers in a fierce gun battle and repulsed the gunmen. There was no report of military casualties in
the Tuesday afternoon attack and it was unknown whether the rebel group suffered casualties in the
fighting in Tagbac village.