A Lethbridge man has been charged after police say he was putting together a small explosive.
Officers responded to Saturday morning calls of shots fired on the city's southside only to find a small
bomb had detonated.

Montreal police are investigating after a Senneville woman was injured when a homemade
explosive went off in her mailbox Wednesday evening. She sustained minor injuries to her upper body but
police say she didn't take an ambulance. The explosion didn't release any toxic substances into the area,
and people in the neighbourhood have nothing to fear.

Police are scouring a neighbourhood in Senneville after an explosion in a residential mailbox. A
large perimeter was set up near Senneville Road and Angus Avenue. The explosion occurred, when a 68-
year-old woman went to retrieve the mail in her mailbox when the explosive device went off.

RCMP was forced to call in a bomb robot Friday morning, when someone reported a suspicious
package on the so-called ‘Whalley Strip.’ Investigators suspected the item may have been an Improvised
Explosive Device, and engaged the assistance of the RCMP Explosives Disposal Unit (EDU). The device was
disposed of around 11 a.m. and no one was hurt. Police could not confirm whether it was actually an
explosive device.

The RCMP’s bomb disposal unit had to get up extra early Thursday morning to blow up a
suspected pipebomb. Members from the Swift Current Municipal RCMP Detachment received a complaint
of an item resembling a pipe bomb. The scene was secured and the three suspicious items were in the
middle of a parking lot. The investigation into the origin and nature of the suspicious items continues.

The Whitehorse airport was briefly evacuated early Friday afternoon, after police received a
report of a suspicious package. Officials said the package turned out to be "innocuous," and people were
soon allowed back inside.

A report a man dropped off two briefcases at a downtown Saskatoon building prompted a
heavy police response and the building’s evacuation. Patrol officers, police dogs and members of the
police’s explosives disposal unit responded to the building. The man, who was arrested, allegedly placed
one briefcase near a door to a business and another in the parking lot.

Cranbrook RCMP says an alleged bomb threat at a local business appeared to be unfounded
after conducting a thorough air and ground search. Multiple police vehicles were on site at Cranbrook
Dodge and adjacent businesses, as RCMP’s General Investigation, Crime Reduction and Police Dog Service
investigated the incident.

A bomb threat closed the Mercier Bridge for a portion of Friday morning. Police said the threat
turned out to be a hoax. The threat backed up traffic even more than usual on the Mercier, which has
been plagued by traffic problems due to construction that has reduced the bridge to one lane of traffic in
each direction.

The New Mexico State Police bomb squat investigated a suspicious package near Ellison and
Jefferson NE and rendered it safe. Conducting x-rays to determine the contents of the package” but did
not say what the package was. The scene at Ellison and Jefferson is clear.

Downtown's Washington Street has reopened downtown after police investigated a suspicious
package that turned out to be a typewriter. The typewriter was found in the vicinity of East Washington
and Delaware streets. A bomb squad was called in as a precaution.

Police investigated a threat of an explosive package that a caller said would be delivered to the
Gateway Post Office. Someone phoned in a threat to the Gateway Post Office. Nothing credible has been
found.

Officials in Manitowoc County were notified of a bomb threat. It happened at the Wal-Mart
store on 4115 Calumet Ave. The store was evacuated. The Manitowoc Police Department use of their K-9
unit that specialize in explosive detection. They say no explosive devices were found and no one was
injured.

Orange County deputies arrested 58-year-old Kerry Ericksen after he told officials that he had
explosives in his vehicle. Deputies say they responded to 4733 Sandy Shores Drive in reference to a suspicious device. After deputies arrested Ericksen, the scene was cleared safe and no explosives were
located, according to OCSO. Ericksen was charged with burglary and bomb threat.