Five Iraqi soldiers were wounded in a bomb explosion south of Baqubah. An explosive charge
planted on the side of a road at al-Naqib village, south of Baqubah, went off.

An Iraqi farmer was injured Thursday in a roadside bomb attack in Baqubah city, Diyala. An
explosive charge planted on the side of an agricultural road south of Miqdadiyah city, Baqubah, went off,
while a vehicle driven by a farmer was passing by the area.

Four Iraqi soldiers were killed and injured in a bomb blast in northeast of Diyala. A bomb,
planted near the haven, went off as the troops advanced, leaving a soldier killed and three others,
including an officer, wounded, according to the official estimates of the hospital.

Three people were killed and injured in a bomb blast, southwest of Kirkuk province. a bomb,
went off at al-Humeira crossroads in al-Rashad town, southwest of Kirkuk. Two people were killed, while
the third was wounded.

A force from the command of Nineveh operations arrested one of the wanted in Eslah
neighborhood, while another force found during the inspection of (Barbandi) village a pile of equipment
containing 11 mortar rounds caliber 12 mm and two 155 mm artillery shells. A security force found three
barrels filled with explosives, two anti-armor and two explosive devices, and eight improvised explosive
devices, which were detonated.

Nineveh Operations Command carried out a search in the camp of the Kasak resulted in the
detonation of 20 explosive devices under the control of the remnants of the Daesh terrorist gangs and also
carried out a process to clear the area of Rokrak and was able to detonate three explosive devices and a
missile without any accident.

Two Iraqi civilians were wounded on Saturday when a bomb blast hit an area west of the
capital. Alghad Press quoted the source saying that the blast occurred near a popular market in al-Zeidan,
Abu Gharib, west of Baghdad.

The Security forces arrested six terrorists carrying weapons and detonated two explosive
devices in different parts of Anbar.

A swat officer was wounded Sunday as a bomb explosion targeted a police vehicle in Iraq’s
Diyala province. An explosive charge went off while a police vehicle was passing by al-Mokhisa gardens on
the outskirts of Abu Saida distric.

Command of the Operations of Nineveh carried out a search in the camp of the Kasak, resulted
in the detonation of 16 explosive devices under the control, from the remnants of the Daesh terrorist
gangs, and carried out a process to clear the area of Rokrak and managed to detonate 3 improvised
explosive devices and an aircraft missile without incident.

Three people were killed and injured in a bomb blast, west of Anbar province. An explosive,
from the remnants of Islamic State war went off while some civilians were passing by the residential
complex at al-Ebeidi region in Qaim town, west of Anbar, near borders with Syria.

Unknown gunmen attacked the office of the candidate of the Turkman (Ammar Hidayat
Kahiyah) in the Ninet neighborhood in central Kirkuk. A security source said that the militants threw a
bomb at the office, which led to a minor injury to a child.

An Iraqi civilian was killed Monday as a landmine left over from the anti-terror war exploded at
a border area in Basra governorat.

The Nineveh Operations Command carried out a search in the camp of the Kasak resulted in
the detonation of 20 explosive devices under the control of the remnants of the Daesh terrorist gangs and
also carried out a process to clear the area of Rokrak and was able to detonate three explosive devices and
a missile without any accident.

An Iraqi civilian was wounded on Tuesday when a bomb exploded near an electric utility in
southeastern Baghdad. An explosive charge went off near a privately-owned electric facility in Jisr Diyala
region.