A Marymount University student was arrested for his involvement with a bomb threat that
forced the campus to evacuate. K-9 units were brought in to sweep the scene and no evidence of a bomb
was found. Police say there was no physical threat to students' safety.

There was no evidence of explosives at the West Rome Walmart Sunday night, after a bomb
threat that temporarily cleared out the store was reported to police. A store employee, who was informed
by a customer of suspicious activity, told police a man allegedly put McDonald’s bags containing explosives
in the restrooms. An officer spoke with the original complainant, who said he saw a man carrying around a
large McDonald’s bag with smaller bags inside. The complainant cited his military background as cause for
his suspicion of the man and his belief he was carrying explosives.

Authorities have found no danger after boarding was halted on a flight out of MidAmerica
Airport when TSA screeners found 'suspicious wires' while checking a passenger's laptop. authorities
announced that the laptop had been determined to be harmless. The computer had a hard drive attached
to it that had triggered the concern. The airport was reopened to normal traffic.

The Tucson Police Department is investigating a suspicious package near Speedway Blvd. and
Tucson Blvd. After TPD investigated a suspicious package near Camp Lowell and Swan, another package
was found near Speedway and Tucson. Authorities tell us the bomb squad is en route. TPD gave the all
clear for the package found.

A bomb threat that led to evacuations at the US Bank building in Downtown Los Angeles
Monday morning was not credible. Employees inside the skyscraper reported being evacuated, but police
were not behind the evacuation. No explosive device was found. It was not a credible threat.

tate police have few leads on the identity or motive of whoever placed a pipe bomb Monday
evening in a quiet Derry Township neighborhood. The pipe was filled with an explosive chemical. A wire
was fed into the pipe, and someone could have sent a charge through the wire to trigger an explosion.
Police are hoping anyone with information will come forward.

The East Palestine Fire Department was called when the East Palestine Family Medical Center
received a suspicious package. A small package was found at the front entrance to the medical center,
although the staff was not expecting any deliveries. The bomb squad determined the package not to be a
threat and instead found it was an unexpected delivery of Aspirin.

A Walmart Supercenter employee was charged with making a bomb threat that forced the
evacuation of the store. Police said a manager at the Walmart called 911 to say that a note was found on a
bathroom wall stating there was a bomb in the building. The building was evacuated, and a host of police
and emergency personnel responded. The Seneca County Sheriff’s Office brought in their bomb-detection
K9 to check the building, and no bomb was found.

A suspicious suitcase was found in the parking lot of a daycare center in the 11000 block of
Shoemaker Street. Police have since cleared the scene. Nothing was found.

Police say a man who was upset his prescription wasn't filled fast enough called in a bomb
threat. Officers said they were called to the 1700 block of Treasure Hills Boulevard where an employee got
the threatening call. The person called and threatened to put a bomb in the building. Investigators say
they learned Rodriguez was upset with how long it was taking to get a prescription filled and was agitated
on the phone when he made the alleged threat.

Employees working at the former Cigna building on Akers were evacuated following a possible
bomb threat at the location. Tulare County sheriff's deputies and members of the bomb squad were called
to investigate the incident. The bomb threat was later discovered to be a false incident.

A bomb threat in the area of Route 35 and J Street turned out to be unfounded. Homes in the
area were briefly evacuated, but no device was found, said spokesmen Jack Sramaty.

Durham police on Tuesday morning investigated a bomb threat at the Nordstrom store at the
Streets at Southpoint mall, continuing a string of threats at the mall since late March. According the first
inspections the threat phone call was declared false.

The FBI has been called in to help assist local law enforcement investigate a bomb threat at the
Dirt Cheap warehouse in Blue Mountain. He says nothing was found and the facility has been deemed
safe. Hundreds of workers were sent home as a result, but they are expected to be back.

A 21-year-old man was arrested after police found a sparkler bomb on the city’s north side.
According to the criminal complaint, the Sheboygan Police Department was dispatched to 1415 North
12th Street after an unknown object was found. The object was covered in duct tape with a wick sticking
out of the end of it and was discovered underneath clothes inside of a baby crib that was in the
apartment. When a police officer cut a strip of the duct tape, a black powdery substance came out of the
object. Based on his training and experience, the officer believed the substance to be gun powder and the
object to be a possible bomb.

The Oklahoma City Police Department responded after a suspicious package was found at a
residence. According to the police, the bomb squad was also called to the home in the 2700 block of
Clermont Place to inspect the suspicious package. The homeowner said nothing was ordered to be
delivered and there are no markings on the package which caused concern.