Explosives disposal unit attends in response to report of suspicious package. A suspicious
package was located on a vacant lot near Walser Street and Keating Drive, Elora. Someone observed a
cardboard box with an explosive label on it and four yellow sticks of dynamite. OPP Explosive Disposal Unit
(E.D.U.) attended and destroyed the dynamite.

Edmonton police closed the Mill Woods Transit Centre and evacuated the public library next
door after a suspicious package was found outside. Library staff called police after seeing a man leaving a
suitcase and running away. The EPS explosive unit detonated the package. No one was injured during the
explosion. Officials declared the area safe.

Shoppers and business owners had a change from their usual routine when Ridge Meadows
RCMP and the bomb squad descended on Meadow Ridge Shopping Centre. An employee of Photo
Express, which is nearby, saw a pipe with some wires in a clear plastic bag, placed just inside the doorway.
The employee said two people then came into the store and told them of the bag.

A suspicious package found at the Bathurst entrance of Toronto Western Hospital has been
tested and found not to be a danger to public safety, and police have re-opened Bathurst after shutting
the area down for the investigation. The package was initially reported as a "box wrapped with electrical
tape" said police spokesperson Gary Long.

The RCMP's explosives unit was called to Parksville for the first time after a suspicious bottle was
found in Community Park. The bottle was securely blown up. Investigators think it might have been a
hoax.

A busy downtown intersection remained blocked off throughout the lunch hour Tuesday as
police responded to an apparent bomb threat at the Chilliwack courthouse again. The IPDS supported by
the sheriffs conducted a thorough search of the interior and the exterior of the courthouse and there was
no explosive device located.

Police say they have deemed a package found at Yonge-Dundas Square on Sunday night to be
harmless. Emergency crews were called to the square for a report of a suitcase or backpack left in the
square. The chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear explosives team was sent to the scene.

An old Hamilton man has been charged with public mischief after a threat to the John Sopinka
Courthouse closed the Main Street East building and several downtown roads. Police announced that a
threat had been made to the courthouse and two suspicious packages had been found. The packages
were deemed safe.

Guelph police say a suspicious backpack left outside the Scottsdale branch of the Guelph Public
Library was a false alarm. Officers were called to a bus stop near the library on Scottsdale Drive by Stone
Road reports of a suspicious package. A specialized robot and two officers could be seen examining the
bag and taking X-ray images, but it was deemed safe.

GO train station in Richmond Hill were evacuated this morning after a bomb threat. York
Regional Police said the call came in at 8 a.m. and the station on Major Mackenzie was shut down for a
search. Nothing was found.

Surrey RCMP say they're investigating after officers seized a package they suspect contained an
improvised explosive from a vehicle. Police say there was an outstanding warrant for the arrest of the man
driving the vehicle. Investigators have not said what led officers to believe the package contained an
explosive in the first place.