A suspicious package addressed to Chief Prosecutor Sotir Tsatsarov was received at the Court
of Justice in Sofia in the early afternoon, BNT reported. It was left at the service entrance of the
Courthouse, from Alabin Street. TOCs and MoI teams check the contents of the package. The scanner
showed that there is a doll inside the pack, wrapped with cables and plugs. Experts check whether the
shipment contains explosives. Finally officials declared safe the area.

For 5 minutes, students from Georgi Benkovski School in Zornitsa district in Burgas were
evacuated after the school warden found suspicious luggage. However, the event is not a real, but a part
of a teaching.

An anonymous male voice called to report that there was an explosive device around the
St.George Church. Police teams immediately arrived on site but however, after the check, it turns out that
the signal is fake.
CYPRUS

An old man from Famagusta was remanded in custody for eights days on Wednesday in
connection with possession of arms and explosives, including an anti-tank missile launcher. The arms
cache was found by police during a search of the man’s home in a rural area of Paralimni. Officers found 
COUNTER IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE
98
an RPG launcher along with its missile and propellants, a fragmentation grenade, a loaded pistol, three
grammes of cocaine, and a bulletproof vest.

A low-level explosive device damaged the front of a shop in Limassol in the early house. The
blast occurred shortly after midnight outside the premises, which was undergoing refurbishment. It
caused minor damage to the facade of the shop.

A bomb exploded at the (basement) garage of former referee Costakis Kapitanis late on
Monday evening in Larnaca, causing extensive damage to the electric door of the garage and a window
located in the basement of the house. The former official currently works for the football association as a
referee observer.

A 27-year-old woman from Cannes was arrested this week outside the CanneSeries television
festival after she yelled “Allah hu Akbar” and threatened to blow herself up. More disturbingly, the 27-
year-old was accompanied by her two children aged two and four years old while she was making threats
to explode. Police were able to quickly arrest the woman who was later taken for a psychiatric evaluation
and hospitalised on the advice of a clinical psychiatrist.

The Greek Police (ELAS) on Monday closed the Athens metro stations Aegaleo and Agia Marina
after receiving telephone calls warning that explosive devices had been placed at both stations. Officers of 
COUNTER IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE
99
the country's bomb disposal squad were dispatched the to station to investigate. There were no details
about what was said during the warning calls and why those particular stations were ostensibly targeted.

Local Gardaí and bomb units responded to a bomb scare at a housing estate in Tipperary. A
security cordon was put in place by Gardaí following the discovery of the suspect device. It’s understood
that several houses in the area were evacuated as well as roads closed. The device was then removed for
further examination. Gardaí have confirmed that investigations are ongoing.

A number of houses had to be evacuated in Strabane, Co Tyrone after a viable explosive device
was discovered. Police discovered a viable explosive device in one of the homes, which resulted in the
evacuation of 10 nearby houses. The ammunition technical officer (ATO) attended the scene to make the
device safe and it was taken away for further examination.

A potential explosive substance – believed to be historic – was discovered close to the busy
Dublin station forcing it to close for several hours. The army EOD attended the suspect item allowing the
station to since reopen.

The nightmare of the extortion racket is back. In the crosshairs' sight, one of the first Chinese
restaurants opened in the city is finished: "China Town" located in Viale Di Vittorio. Unknown in the night
they placed a paper bomb at the foot of the gate. The explosion was so violent that it was heard in much
of the city. Significant damage caused by the deflagration. The gate is completely destroyed, the luminous sign is completely destroyed. The impact force of the bomb also caused damage to the interior
furnishings. In addition, the windshields and windows of three cars parked near the restaurant are
shattered.