A 42-year-old former Calabrina local election candidate, Matteo Vinci, died at Limbadi near Vibo
Valentia in Calabria as the car he was driving blew up because of a bomb on Monday. Carabinieri said the
bomb, in the car boot, was remotely activated. Vinci's 70-year-old father Vincenzo was seriously injured in
the blast. He is fighting for his life in hospital. Vinci, a former medicines salesman, was a candidate in a
civic list in the last town council elections.

Italian police said Friday they had stopped a van from France that had five pounds of explosives
on board, in what they stressed was not terror-related. The vehicle was searched in an anti-drug operation
as it crossed into Italy at the Mt. Blanc Tunnel earlier that day, the national police said on social media.
"The explosives have been seized and an investigation is underway," law enforcers said in a Facebook post
that carried a photo of a batch of trinitrotoluene (TNT).

A suspicious package left at the door of Auberge de Castille led to the temporary evacuation of
the prime minister's office as well as the square in front of it. Video footage and photos show a deserted
Castille Square as bomb disposal experts inspect the area. The package appeared to be a handbag.

A car bomb exploded on Sunday outside the home of a journalist who was investigating
organized crime groups in Montenegro. The explosion rocked the northern Montenegrin city of Bijelo
Polje an hour after a new pledge by the National Security Council to tackle organized crime. No one was
injured in the bombing, the seventh this year.

The recent violent acts in Barcelona promoted by a CDR, violent and organized crimminal
groupo close to independentist movement, are linked with an terrorist attack that a car bodyshop has
suffered. The IED was composed basically by an initiator temporized and a camp gas bottle like main
charge. The explosion produced several material damages on the place.

A man was detained for stoling explosives located in a mine. The quantity of it raised to 1.864
grams and 23 detonators. Law enforcement thought that there can be two other men linked with this
incident. The destiny of this material was destinated to the black market.

An apartment building in Gothenburg was evacuated by police on Tuesday morning after a
suspected bomb was found in a crawl space underneath it. Police said they had detonated the object.
can't say any more at present other than that we are waiting for the results of the investigation and we
are waiting for the technicians.

At least two Turkish soldiers were martyred and another injured on Friday when an improvised
explosive device planted by PKK terrorists detonated in the southeastern province of Hakkari. The incident
occurred during a military operation against PKK terrorists in Hakkari’s Cukurca district, said the source,
who asked not to be named due to restrictions on talking to the media.

A Turkish villager has been injured in a landmine blast on the Turkish side of the shared border
with Armenia. Erhan Bulut, 42, resident of the Kalittash village in Kars province stepped on a mine while
grazing cattle close to the border. A spokesperson for Igdir Hospital has said the man is out of danger.

At least 43 terrorists have been "neutralized" as part of counter-terror operations held across
Turkey over the past week, according to the Interior Ministry. During the operations, the security sources
also destroyed 61 shelters including caves and 49 hand-made explosives in operations held in eastern
Sirnak, Bitlis, Diyarbakir, Hakkari, Mus, Mardin, Siirt, Tunceli, Van and Bingol provinces, the statement said.
In addition, 1.5 tons of explosive materials, 43 hand-grenades, 47 weapons and over 18,000 rounds of
munition were seized.

Two Turkish soldiers were martyred and two PKK terrorists were neutralized during counterterrorism operations in eastern and southeastern Turkey. In a statement, the Turkish General Staff said
one soldier was martyred in Cukurca in the southeastern Hakkari province when he fell from a cliff in the
midst of counter-terrorism operations. the general staff said that in addition to neutralizing two PKK
terrorists, four Kalashnikovs, an M-16, two bombs, 120 weapons cartridges, and a radio were also seized.

Two Turkish soldiers were martyred and two PKK terrorists were neutralized during counterterrorism operations in eastern and southeastern Turkey. the general staff said that in addition to
neutralizing two PKK terrorists, four Kalashnikovs, an M-16, two bombs, 120 weapons cartridges, and a radio were also seized. The military generally uses the term "neutralize" to signify that the targets either
surrendered or were killed or captured. The statement also said eight explosive devices were also
destroyed.