A soldier was martyred when an improvised explosive device planted by the PKK terror group
blew up in southeastern Sirnak province.

Sloviansky police department received information that the local resident found the cache of
ammunition at the territory of household in Sviatohirsk. Police found about 1,500 cartridges and two
grenade launchers in a non-residential building in the Donetsk region. This was reported by the press
service of the National Police of Ukraine.

Four civilians blew up in their car, apparently as it drove on an explosive device near the
demarcation line in the conflict-struck area of Luhansk region. It was preliminarily established that the car
was damaged in an IED (anti-tank mine, according to a preliminary report) blast. The device detonated as
the car drove over it.

Petrol bombs and stones have been thrown at police vehicles during an illegal dissident
republican parade in Londonderry. About 200 people attended the Easter Rising 1916 commemoration
parade in the Creggan estate . They were led by masked men in paramilitary-style uniforms. There were
no reports of injuries or arrests.

Police said the flat was entered and set on fire in the early hours of Saturday. A TV was also
stolen from the property. The flat was unoccupied at the time of the incident and there were no reports of
any injuries. Minor damage was caused throughout the flat. Officers are appealing for anyone who saw
any suspicious activity in the Mark Street area or who may have information which could assist with them
with their enquiries to contact detectives at Bangor PSNI Station .

Police and the Fire Service were called to the Renfrewshire Drug Service building at around
10am this morning and the road has been closed indefinitely. Police Scotland and the Fire service were
called out to Paisley’s Back Sneddon Street. They searched the area trying to look for a suspicious item but
this action was unfructified.

A man has been arrested on suspicion of possession of explosive substances after the bomb
squad were called to a flat in Flintshire. Homes were evacuated and chemicals experts were drafted in to
deal with the incident at Bron y Wern in Bagillt. The alert was raised after an ambulance went to a flat at
around 5am after reports a man there was feeling unwell.

Suspicious packages were found at the centre on Baird Avenue, Dundee. The bomb squad has
been called to a Tesco call centre after suspicious packages were found. Suspicious packages were found
at the centre on Baird Avenue. Police later confirmed a controlled explosion was carried out.

A suspicious package found inside London’s Central Library on Sunday had to be moved by the
bomb squad to a secure location so it could be destroyed. Police did not release information about how
the package arrived in the library, or give any details about a possible suspect.

Schools across the Midlands have been sent bomb threats. Police are investigating but the
West Midlands force said they were believed to be 'false and malicious'.

An detective Chief Inspector said: They’ve been made aware of a hoax email sent to schools in
the force area this morning 13 April 2018. We want to categorically reassure parents and children, staff
and the wider public that this a non-credible threat that has been sent nationwide.

There are currently multiple schools shut as well as Bath College after the threat was sent out
across the country. It comes after 400 schools in England received chilling messages claiming an explosive
had been placed on the grounds and would go off unless a cash payment was sent. After inspecioning the
school the area was declared safe.

A bomb squad was sent into Peterborough prison with the Category B jail placed on lockdown.
Eyewitnesses at the scene said the incident was being led by the RAF Explosive Ordnance Disposal team.
An explosives robot was sent to the prison, and was later pictured gaining access to a vehicle in a car park
on the prison grounds. The Peterborough Telegraph reported the investigation centred around the engine bay of a vehicle parked within the prison complex. After intervention, the officials declared render in safe
the vehicle.