Bolton Police Department received a report that an anonymous bomb threat note had been
discovered at the Bolton Public Library, prompting a police response. Out of an abundance of caution, and
to ensure public safety, the library was evacuated and closed early for the night. During the course of the
investigation, a juvenile from the Town of Clinton was positively identified as the person who left the note.
The threat was considered no credible.

Fairbanks police and Fort Wainwright soldiers have retrieved a pressure cooker, which was
reported as a suspicious package near a pool bracketed by two schools. Pressure cookers can readily be
converted into bombs, as seen during the deadly 2013 Boston Marathon bombing by the Tsarnaev
brothers. They were able to open it and it was not a threat.

Deputies found the materials needed to build pipe bombs inside a home in northwest Jackson
County.

A suspicious safe, complete with a key, caused Bluemound Road businesses in Brookfield
provoked closed down for several hours, out of concern that it might be a bomb. But those fears proved to
be unfounded.

Crews have cleared U.S. Rep. Ted Yoho's Gainesville office after staff reported an envelope
with a suspicious powder inside. Gainesville Fire-Rescue says their hazardous materials team collected the
powder, analyzed it and determined it was harmless before turning it over to the FBI.

Explosive ordnance experts have determined that a suspicious package left inside the gate of
the Puget Sound Naval Shipyard near the ferry terminal in Bremerton is not an explosive threat.

Authorities have cleared a bomb threat at Quad Graphics in Lomira that had the facility shut
down and evacuated for approximately six hours. No explosives were found and employees have been
allowed to return to work.

Detroit police have given the all-clear after being called to a suspicious package near the
McNamara Federal Building in the area of 1st and Howard Streets in Downtown Detroit. Detroit's Bomb
Squad was called to investigate and gave the all clear.

A man claiming to have a bomb robbed PNC Bank in downtown Plainwell and escaped on foot
north of the city. People were evacuated from businesses and road blocks were set up around town.
When the suspicious was arrested nothing was found.

Authorities have cleared the building of Quad Graphics after a bomb threat had the facility
evacuated and shut down for nearly six hours. No explosives were found after a thorough search of the
building by K9 teams. Employees were able to eventually return to work

Fort Drum emergency officials evacuated and closed the building that houses the post office
for about two hours Thursday because of a suspicious package. The package was found and after
searching process officials determined it was safe.

The Albuquerque Police Department bomb squad rendered a “suspicious device” safe after
finding it at an auto body shop. Officer Simon Drobik, an APD spokesman, said police were called the 2300
block of Aztec NE was closed while they investigated. He said the device was found at A1 Collision but he
did not say what it was or why it was suspicious.

The bomb squad was called out to a Richmond neighborhood Saturday morning for a report of
a suspicious package. The package in question was a small, metal suitcase. According to officers, there was
nothing of note inside and the scene was deemed safe.

A suspicious package forced the evacuation of Los Angeles City Hall. The package was reported
in the 200 block of North Spring Street, just outside the building, underneath some trees. A Los Angeles
Police Department bomb squad was called to the scene. The exact nature of the item was unknown.

THE White House was placed on lockdown after Donald Trump's Secret Service discovered a
suspicious package following a security breach at the US President's Washington DC residence. The DC
Police Department's bomb squad were called to investigate the "suspicious" item, which was later
deemed "safe" by the authorities. The man was later arrested by the President’s Secret Service officers
and DC's bomb squad declared the package "safe".

Omaha police were called to check out a suspicious suitcase lying on the sidewalk between
17th and 20th St. on Howard St. The bomb squad was called in to assist but the effort revealed only a
suitcase containing clothing. The scene was cleared and reopened to traffic.