A blast occurred on Tuesday reportedly close to a girls school in Afghanistan's eastern Nangarhar
province, confirmed the Afghan authorities. According to Afghan's TOLO News, no reports of casualties or
injuries have been reported by far.

A bomb attack on a voter registration centre in northern Baghlan province of Afghanistan on
Wednesday killed at least two people. A security official told Afghanistans Pajhwok Afghan News on
condition of anonymity that the blast took place in the Khwja Alwan area of Pul-i-Khumri. He told the news
agency that Nalem Karim, in charge of the voter registration centre, and Baghlan-Samangan highway
commander Rahmuddin were killed in the bombing, which was followed by gunfire.

The Afghan army personnel found 38 improvised bombs and landmines within the last 24 hours.
The Afghan National Army (ANA) engineering teams recovered 38 rounds of improvised explosive devices
(IEDs) and landmines since early Monday. And they safely destroyed the explosives across Afghanistan.
Taliban militants and Islamic State fighters have been using IEDs to make roadside bombs and landmines
for targeting security forces, but the lethal home-made weapons also inflict casualties on civilians.

At least four people, including a prominent religious scholar and two guards, were killed and 12
others wounded in a bomb attack in Mehtarlam city .

Afghan security forces on Sunday seized 156 sacks of ammonium nitrate, widely used in making
explosives, from the back of a vegetable truck crossing from Pakistan, an official said, in one of the biggest such finds. Intelligence officers found nearly eight tonnes of the chemical, “brought for insurgent
activities”, hidden under sacks of vegetables on the truck at the Torkham border crossing, at the end of
the Khyber Pass, a spokesman for the governor of Nangarhar province.

A magnetic bomb blast in Kampani area of Afghanistan's Kabul city left at least five people
injured. He told the Afghanistan-based news agency that the blast occurred at around 11:30am and
slightly wounded two policemen and three civilians as result. The injured people were rushed to a
hospital for treatment.

Afghan security forces on Sunday seized 156 sacks of ammonium nitrate, widely used in making
explosives, from the back of a vegetable truck crossing from Pakistan, an official said, in one of the biggest
such finds. Intelligence officers found nearly eight tonnes of the chemical, “brought for insurgent
activities”, hidden under sacks of vegetables on the truck at the Torkham border crossing, at the end of
the Khyber Pass, a spokesman for the governor of Nangarhar province told Reuters. Ammonium nitrate is
widely used as a fertiliser, but for security reasons, imports into Afghanistan are banned.

Casualties were feared as roadside bomb struck a civilian vehicle in Afghanistan's eastern
Ghazni province.

More than a dozen civilians were injured in a bomb blast at a fair in the Chaparhar district of
eastern Nangarhar province on Monday, an official said.

Thirty-four militants and seven police were killed and 14 people were wounded in daily
violence in Afghanistan. In one incident, 12 civilians were wounded after an improvised explosive device
(IED) was detonated at a public picnic area in Chaparhar district, eastern Nangarhar province. In northern Jawzjan province, seven police personnel were killed and two others wounded after Taliban militants
attacked a security checkpoint in Khoja Bolan, on outskirts of provincial capital Shiberghan city. Also in
Nangarhar, 34 Taliban militants were killed after Special Operations Forces of National Directorate of
Security (NDS), the country's primary intelligence agency raided a Taliban hideout in Zawi area of Khogyani
district of Nangarhar. The security forces also destroyed weapons and explosive materials.

As many as three Afghan civilians were killed on Monday when American troops opened fire
after their vehicle struck a roadside bomb.

Dozen people killed, tens injured in Kabul suicide blast. Police Spokesman told Pajhwok Afghan
News the blast occurred at 1:00pm.

Trenkoit (BNA) Plot of Taliban for organizing of series of blasts failed in Urozgan province. Four
mine planters of Taliban while wanted to plant a mine on main road of the province, they were killed in
attack of security forces. Senior commander of ANA in south of the country told BNA, the four mine
planters associated to Taliban group were killed by security forces.

A group of three attackers launched attack on education department in eastern Nangarhar
province this morning. According to reports, first attacker blow-up his explosive material in front of
entrance gate of the department and two other attackers while wanted to enter into education
department’s building shot dead by Afghans security forces. Ataullah Khogyani spokesman of Nangarhar
governor told BNA reporter, civilians and Afghan security forces didn’t harmed following the attack.