The bomb squad was called to investigate a suspicious bag in the south ticketing area of
Terminal D at Bush Intercontinental Airport. Airport spokesman Bill Begley said someone found an
unattended bag in the south ticketing area. An explosives sniffing dog was brought in to check the bag.
The passenger has been identified as Jose Emanuel Morquecho Carrillo. He was charged with making a
terroristic threat.

The Portsmouth courthouse building has been evacuated due to a bomb threat. According to
the Portsmouth Sheriff's Office, a threat was called in to the courthouse in the morning. The building was
evacuated just after receiving the threat . Nothing suspicious was found

A toy grenade in a passenger’s bag forced the shutdown of a security checkpoint at Houston’s
William P. Hobby Airport Thursday morning, inconveniencing hundreds of people catching early-morning
flights. Houston Airport System spokesman Bill Begley said people were allowed to approach the
checkpoint again after a bomb squad determined that the suspicious item spotted by a Transportation
Security Administration agent was a “novelty grenade.”

Syracuse Police say a prank call is to blame for the mid-day evacuation of the Axa Tower
Downtown. Employees were evacuated as a precaution, but the Onondaga County Sheriff's Office did not
find any suspicious items located in the building. The incident occurred around noon.

A Missoula County bomb squad buried and detonated a couple of explosive devices near
Blacktail Creek. No one was hurt. 

Police are investigating what they determined was the shell of a homemade explosive device
found inside a pickup truck that was left parked at an apartment complex in Middlesex County . Officers
secured the area as New Jersey State Police and FBI Homeland Security determined it was an explosive
device, but it did not appear to be active or filled with explosive powder

Emergency crews called to a local home to help a man who had apparently overdosed found
much more than a person in distress. The Hot Springs Police Department says the Arkansas State Police
(ASP) Bomb Squad had to be called to the scene when three possible explosive devices were found inside
the man's apartment. It happened shortly before 1 a.m. Thursday at an apartment on Alcorn Street. The
ASP Bomb Squad removed the devices and disposed of them. Investigators are still looking into the case.

A male was arrested on Thursday after authorities responded to a bomb threat at the Central
Valley Medical Center in Nephi. The alleged bomb was in a vehicle parked in a parking lot. t was
eventually determined that there was no bomb.

Police in Brattleboro, Vermont have caught a man allegedly responsible for a bomb hoax on
Thursday night. Brattleboro's Justin Clough, 39, was arrested and charged with a felony for placing a hoax
device at the Brattleboro Retreat. Brattleboro police responded to a call to a report of a suspected explosive device that was located outside of the building. The perimeter was secured and area evacuated
as the Brattleboro Fire Department assisted the police in setting up an incident command post.

The Reading Police Bomb Squad was called to the Santander Bank at King's Plaza in Oley
Township this morning after bank officials reported a suspicious duffle bag someone left outside the
building overnight. The green, U.S. military bag was X-rayed and found to contain clothing, according to
Central Berks Regional police.

A North Carolina courthouse was evacuated after a bomb threat was called in. The Mecklenburg
County Sheriff's Office posted to its Twitter page that the courthouse in uptown Charlotte was evacuated .
The sheriff's office said deputies and K9 units searched the building, and the all clear was sounded .