At least seven people including six members of an extended family were killed in a roadside
blast in Bula-burte district in Hiraan region of central Somalia. Landmine explosion which occurred near
Bula-burte town today killed seven people; six of them were members of the same family. The family was
carrying four children who were suffering from measles and were heading to the town.

Four Ugandan peacekeeping soldiers with the African Union (AU) have been killed by Al Shabaab
extremists following an attack on a base in the south of Somalia, AP reported.

A roadside bomb killed at least seven people on Sunday - mostly women farmers - in an area
outside the Somali capital dominated by Islamist insurgents who have defied public protests to end years
of violence. heard a huge crash today and we went to the scene, we saw a ruined minibus and at least
seven dead bodies, mostly women. We could not identify some people, they were just pieces of human
flesh.

A car bomb blew up at another checkpoint near Sei Piano area. The blast killed two soldiers and
wounded some others, while three militants were eliminated by the Somali troops.

At least six individuals were killed and some others injured as a result of twin car bomb attacks
in Somalia’s capital of Mogadishu. The first explosives-laden car exploded near the city's Aden Abdulle
Airport when intercepted by the local intelligence at the checkpoint. The bomber died, while three
National Intelligence and Security Agency members were injured.

The Al-Shabaab has attacked Kenyan military forces in Fahfahdhun area in Somalia's
southwestern Gedo region, killing an unknown number of soldiers. The attack began with a roadside bomb
blast targeted a convoy carrying KDF soldiers in the small town of Fahfahdhun and followed by a direct
gun battle between the two sides.

Bomb blast at packed Somalia stadium kills 5 football fans as al-Shabab claims responsibility.

The attack happened in Il-baq area near the town, after roadside bomb explosion tore through
a military vehicle carrying soldiers near Balcad, leaving 4 soldiers dead on board. Al Shabaab fighters
armed with RPGs and machine-guns had ambushed the soldiers following the explosion, triggering fierce
clash.

At least two senior Somali army soldiers were killed and unknown others injured in a landmine
attack near Bal'ad town in Middle Shabelle region in southern Somalia.

Al Shabaab has carried out a bomb attack in Barawe city in Somalia's southern Lower Region.
The Al Qaeda-linked militant group issued a statement claiming an attack using a remote-controlled
landmine targeting Somali military checkpoint in the town. At least three Somali military soldiers were
killed and several others wounded in the blast.

At least two civilian killed and several wounded in action in a deadly explosion happened in the
outskirts of capital of Somalia. The explosion took place on the street triggered by a roadsidebomb that
impacted over the vehicle. No suspects about the authorship of this crime.

At least five people, including three military officials, were killed when a suicide bomber blew
himself up Saturday morning at a busy restaurant in the Somali town of Galkayo. A man wearing an
explosive vest has detonated himself in a crowded restaurant in northern Galkayo targeting security
officials drinking tea early in the morning, killing three security officials and two soldiers. Eight people
were injured.

Six people died and several were seriously injured when a petrol bomb was thrown at a bus
transporting them to work at a mine outside Burgersfort. Police were alerted and found that the bus had
already burned to ashes with six victims inside. Others escaped through windows with burn wounds and
were taken to hospital for treatment. The bus was transporting night shift workers.

An apparent firebombing on Thursday claimed the lives of five people who had moved into
their new double-storey home only a week ago, amid rumours of an argument with a neighbour the night
before. Police are still unsure what the exact cause of the fatal blaze was, but it is suspected that a petrol
bomb was thrown into the house in a quiet side street in Willowton.

Vrygrond residents demanding land to build informal housing on resumed their violent protests
in the Capricorn area , allegedly petrol bombing passing cars and setting alight buildings.