As part of the fight against terrorism and the efficient use of intelligence, a detachment of
the People’s National Army arrested, on October 17, 2017, two (2) elements supporting terrorist groups in
Tiaret, while another detachment discovered and destroyed one (01) homemade bomb in Bejaïa. As part
of the fight against smuggling and organized crime, detachments of the People’s National Army
apprehended in Tamanrasset, In Guezzam and Bordj Badji Mokhtar, (26) smugglers and seized (2.7) tons
of foodstuffs, (1200) liters of fuel and (02) vehicles.

Three bunkers for terrorists containing subsistence living and a home-made bomb was
discovered and destroyed Monday in Batna and Ain Defla by detachments of the National Popular Army
(ANP). In addition, 13 smugglers have been to El Oued Tamanrasset and Bordj Badji Mokhtar, in
operations that allowed the seizure of two all-terrain vehicles, 10 metal detectors, 1,380 liters of fuel, 2
satellite phones and 4,406 bags of tobacco, while elements of the national gendarmerie have arrested
four drug traffickers and seized 14.3 kilograms of hashish treated Tlemcen and Biskra.

As part of the fight against smuggling and organized crime, detachments of the NPA have
arrested, in El Oued, Tamanrasset and Bordj Badji Mokhtar, 13 smugglers and seized two 2 all-terrain
vehicles, 10 metal detectors, 1380 liters of fuel, 2 satellite telephones and 4406 tobacco bags, while
elements of the National Gendarmerie have arrested 4 drug traffickers and seized 14.3 kilograms of
hashish in Tlemcen and Biskra.

Two suicide bombers detonated their explosives in Mozogo (Far North region) on the morning
of Monday, October 2. Three people were reportedly killed in the attack, including the two assailants.
Athough no group or individual has claimed responsibility for the blast, it is likely linked to Boko Haram.

A home-made device exploded overnight near a police station in Cameroon's restless Englishspeaking region, where separatist leaders have launched a campaign for independence. There were no
reported casualties. The bomb detonated near a police unit . There was no claim of responsibility by late
afternoon.

A car bomb was detonated by security officials before it exploded at a checkpoint in northeastern Sinai, Egypt. Soldiers fired repeatedly at the vehicle which was driving towards the checkpoint,
detonating it before it reached the soldiers on duty.

The Coptic Orthodox Church has confirmed that the Improvised explosive devise (IED)، found
earlier this morning، was located very far from the Church of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Explosive experts
have defused a bomb found near a car in Rawd al-Faraj district، without any casualties or injuries.

Militants killed at least 23 soldiers and injured dozens more in a car explosion and gun attack
on an Egyptian military checkpoint in the north-eastern Sinai peninsula.

Three policemen, one security guard and a civilian were killed and a number of other people
injured in an attack by militants in Egypt's North Sinai province. The militants attacked a security post
securing a National Bank of Egypt branch in Arish, the provincial capital, with explosives and guns.

In one of the most deadly militant attacks targeting Egypt’s security forces, militants are said
to have fired rockets and detonated explosives, killing at least 52 police officers and conscripts. So far, no
group has claimed Friday’s attack - even though experts have pointed out that most of the fighting so far
between militants and security forces has been in northern Sinai, where an Islamic State affiliate operates.

Suspected militants on Sunday targeted a police vehicle in the turbulent northern part of
Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, killing two conscripts. The police truck with a roadside bomb detonated remotely
then opened fire. No group claimed responsibility for the attack.

Five Al-Shabaab terrorists were on Monday killed in a military operation in Boni Forest. Six
AK-47 assault rifles, 321 rounds of ammunition, three grenades and explosives were confiscated after the
onslaught by Kenya Defence Forces.

Al-Shabaab planted the Improvised Explosive Device (IED) at Mambore-Mkokoni Junction
near the Kiunga KenGen Power Station in Lamu East, targeting the officers on patrol.

Sources from the city and the media office of Al=Bunyan Al-Msrsous said two ISIS militnats
carried out an explosion at the Misurata courts compound killing four people and injuring at least 15
others. The explosion took place before midday on Wednesday, and sources added that two attackers
were killed. Local media reported that the courts compound suffered great damage over the suicide
attack.

The Information Center of Al-Bunyan Al-Marsoos Operation has stated that one of their bomb
disposal teams succeeded in dismantling 154 kilograms of explosives from the car used by the terrorists in
yesterday’s attack on Misrata courthouse. The car was parked in front of the courthouse and the bomb
intended to be used by the three ISIS suicide bombers to cause as many fatalities as possible.

Three United Nations soldiers from Chad were killed and two others wounded by an
explosive device as they were escorting a convoy in northern Mali. The mission said in a statement that
the peacekeepers’ vehicle struck the explosive device between the northern towns of Tessalit and
Aguelhok.