A detachment of People’s National Army discovered and destroyed, in Tébessa, eight casemates
for terrorists and four homemade bombs.

A bunker containing two homemade bombs was destroyed Saturday in a search operation
conducted by a detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP) in the province of Skikda while another
detachment destroyed a mine in the province of Jijel.

Seven bunkers for terrorists and seven homemade bombs were discovered and destroyed
Sunday in Batna and Tebessa by detachments of the People’s National Army.

Twelve bunkers for terrorists and twenty-three homemade bombs were found and destroyed by
detachments of the National People's Army (ANP) on Wednesday during separate operations in Tebessa,

A terrorist supporter was arrested Thursday in Jijel (320-km east of Algiers) by an Army
detachment, which discovered and destroyed a homemade bomb, the ministry of National Defense said.

Fourteen terrorist bunkers and seven homemade bombs were discovered and destroyed Sunday in Jijel by an Army detachment, the ministry of National Defense.

Four bunkers for terrorists and 4 homemade bombs were discovered and destroyed in the province of Medea, Bouira and Batna by detachments of the People’s National Army (ANP).

A bunker for terrorists and three homemade bombs were discovered and destroyed Tuesday by detachments of the People’s National Army.

arms and ammunition cache containing seven BM-21 artillery rocket heads, seven propelling charges and 49 detonators was discovered Wednesday in Bordj Badji Mokhtar by a detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP).

Terrorist bunker containing five homemade bombs was destroyed in Skikda (510-km east of
Algiers) by an Army detachment, the ministry of National Defense said Tuesday in a statement.

At least nine people, including a priest, have been killed in an attack on a church in Bangui, the
capital of the Central African Republic. Witnesses said assailants attacked the church, shooting and using
grenades. The church-goers were trapped inside the compound.

At least nine people, including a priest, have been killed in an attack on a church in Bangui, the
capital of the Central African Republic. Witnesses said assailants attacked the church, shooting and using
grenades. The church-goers were trapped inside the compound.

An Egyptian police officer was killed and another top security official injured when their
armored vehicle struck a roadside bomb in North Sinai.

There was a bomb scare in Thika Town after a suspicious object was found inside a shop. The
gadget was discovered neatly wrapped inside an animal products shop along Uhuru Street. Thika
Administration Police Commandant Peter Nzimbi however said detectives concluded that it was not an
explosive.

Suicide bombers stormed the head offices of Libya’s electoral commission in Tripoli on
Wednesday, killing at least tweelve people and setting fire to the building in an attack claimed by the
Islamic State militant group.