A car bomb hit the convoy of the chief of staff of the eastern Libyan military outside Benghazi
on Wednesday, killing one person and wounding at least two other people, though he himself survived.

A terrorist group on Saturday blew up a crude oil pipeline near the capital Tripoli. An explosion
and fire broke out as a result of terrorist act in one of the valves on the 24 inch crude oil pipeline
northwest of the town of Mrada, some 500km east of Tripoli.

A 12-year-old boy was injured by a landmine explosion near a police station in the downtown
of Benghazi. The child was wounded by shrapnel in his abdomen, which required a surgical operation
immediately.

Two UN peacekeepers were killed and 10 others wounded on Thursday night during an attack
on their camp in northeastern Mali, the UN's mission. The peacekeepers came under mortar fire," the
mission, known by its acronym MINUSMA. Mali is one of the most dangerous UN missions, with more than
150 peacekeepers killed since 2013.

Militants disguised as U.N. peacekeepers exploded two suicide car bombs and fired dozens of
rockets at the French and United Nations bases in Mali’s northern city of Timbuktu on Saturday, killing one
and wounding many. The U.N. mission confirmed that the complex attack had killed a U.N. peacekeeper.
The Malian government said in addition that 10 French soldiers had been wounded

Several loud explosions rocked the northern Mali city of Timbuktu on Sunday near military
bases where one U.N peacekeeper was killed and seven French troops were wounded last weekend by
Islamist militants.
NIGERIA
No fewer than 15 persons are feared dead and 55 others sustained injuries in a Sunday night
attack by Boko Haram insurgents at Bale community in the outskirts of Maiduguri. The source disclosed
that the insurgents parked their vehicles few meters away from a security check point and sneaked into
the community. The source added that the security operatives engaged in fierce gun battle with the
insurgents who detonated Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs) and shot sporadically.

Armed robbers in central Nigeria used dynamite to blow up a vault in a bank, killing 16 people.

The Nigerian Air Force says its Special Forces in conjunction with some Nigerian Army troops,
successfully foiled a suicide bomb attack by Boko Haram Terrorists at the University of Maiduguri, Borno
State. The vest on one of the suicide bombers detonated before they could gain access into the hostel,
leading to a commotion.

A group of Nigerian soldiers escaped death by whiskers during a clearance operation in the
Northeast area of the country. The soldiers reportedly stepped on Improvised explosive devices(IED)
during the operation. Some can be seen lying in pain and while others were being attended to by fellow
gallant soldiers.

Four worshippers have been confirmed killed following a suicide attack on a mosque in
Nigeria's northeastern town of Bama. At least eight others were wounded after two suicide bombers, a
male and female, detonated their improvised explosive devices inside the mosque during a morning
prayer in the town located in the northern state of Borno.

The police in Borno said they had foiled a suicide bomb attack, coordinated by Boko Haram
insurgents in Bama town area of the state. He said that the three suicide bombers were neutralised by
policemen on guard in the area.

The Nigerian National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) has completed the evacuation
of corpses to the mortuary after a Boko Haram attack in Maiduguri. The terrorists fired sporadically and
detonated improvise explosive devices (IEDs). The Borno State Police Command promptly deployed
combat teams of SARS, PMF and EOD to support the Military and the Divisional Police Officer.

An alleged bomb explosion Sunday rocked the country home of the president General
Ohanaeze Ndi Igbo general assembly chief Nnia Nwodo as unknown men allegedly set the minor explosion
at Ukehe residence of the president general of the Igbo socio cultural association.

Al Shabab fighters detonated two car bombs outside the base in the town of Bulamarer, southwest of Mogadishu. Local residents say they heard heavy exchanges of gunfire which lasted more than
three hours. It is unclear exactly how many people died in the attack but both sides say many people died
as AU and Somali troops defended the base.