A man who claimed to have a bomb in his car and threatened to set it off in the parking lot of an
Acme supermarket in Wildwood. Police have not yet disclosed if they found any explosives in the vehicle
and a Wildwood police dispatcher would only say the incident was under investigation.

 An Eden Prairie Walmart was shut down for more than three hours Monday because of a bomb
threat. Nothing suspicious was found. The threat was discovered in the morning, and the store was
evacuated. Officials have not said how the threat was received.

Investigators with the Bibb County Sheriff’s Office are looking into a bomb threat at the Bibb
County Courthouse. everyone inside the building was evacuated while the fire department and EOD
searched the building top to bottom. In the morning they receive a call and thy have personnel in the
building that are starting to sweep the building from the fifth floor working their way down. Nothing
suspicious was found.

Voters are being allowed back in after the Montgomery Field polling place was evacuated. The
polling station was evacuated after a janitor found what he believed was a grenade in a trash can. Voters
in the area were temporarily rerouted to the St. Columba polling station due to the incident. Investigators
who arrived on scene quickly determined that the object was a training grenade

Deputies have arrested a woman they say robbed two businesses while threatening to use an
explosive device. She is charged with two counts each of armed robbery and making a bomb threat.

According to Shawano County Sheriff Adam Bieber, a fake threat is to blame for a large police
presence in the Village of Birnamwood. The sheriff's office received a phone call threatening violence
against some residents unless specific demands were met within a limited time frame. Authorities isolated
the area of the alleged threat. The threat was later determined to be fake. The community is returning to
normal and the incident is now under investigation.

A 56-year-old man and a 37-year-old man surrendered at a home near Baldwin Park Tuesday
afternoon, hours after a pair of acid bombs were detonated outside the home. Deputies were called to a
home on Beach Boulevard along the south shore of Lake Susannah after residents reported hearing a loud
"boom".

The McKenzie County Sheriff’s Office says that authorities conducted a controlled detonation of
the suspicious device. There is no threat to life or property at this time. The Sheriff's Department says the
suspicious device was a backpack with some wires inside. A suspicious device was located in the vehicle
and they called in the Minot Bomb Squad.

Wednesday following a bomb threat made at a Meijer store in Northville Township . The
suspect’s vehicle was found parked in front of the store with wires and other suspicious materials inside.
He does have some prior criminal convictions, according to Mutchler. No injuries were reported. The all
clear was given around 2:30 p.m.

Authorities on the scene tell WMBD that earlier Wednesday morning, officers served a search
warrant for a building located on South 13th and Broadway streets in Pekin. Upon entering the building,
officers found an apparent flammable device and immediately called the bomb squad. It's unknown at this
time why a search warrant was served. Multiple agencies are on the scene. Residents have been asked to
vacate the area until it's deemed safe.

New Mexico State Police's Bomb Squad has deemed a suspicious piece of luggage. Main Street
was closed between Fifth and Sixth streets Wednesday afternoon after someone spotted the piece of
luggage at the bus station. Businesses in the area were also evacuated as a precaution. Police so there
were no explosives inside the luggage

The Tennessee Highway Patrol bomb squad responded to the Walmart on Murfreesboro Road.
Police said the suspicious package was reported in the parking. LA VERGNE, Tenn. The La Vergne Police
Department cleared the scene of a suspicious package. The Tennessee Highway Patrol bomb squad responded to the Walmart on Murfreesboro Road. Police said the suspicious package was reported in the
parking . The suspicious package was a suitcase full of clothes left near a trashcan in the parking lot,
according to police. Everyone inside the store and the parking lot was evacuated for a few hours.