 Two soldiers died after the vehicle carrying them ran over an improvised explosive device (IED)
on the outskirt of Bal'ad town, about 30 kilometers north of Mogadishu. The blast hit the military vehicle
and killed two of the soldiers. This is the work of the terrorist group, they are always targeting our security
forces.

At least three Somali military soldiers were reported to have been killed and several wounded
in a roadside bomb explosion in the country’s southern Lower Shabelle region. Residents said a remotecontrolled landmine struck an army convoy carrying Somali special forces at Warmahan area as they were
en route to the Balli Doogole Airbase in the region.

The newly appointed Lower Shabelle governor, Mohamed Ibrahim Barre has been slightly
wounded in an explosion on the outskirts of Mogadishu. At least one soldier was killed and several officails
have sustained injuries after a convoy they were travelling in hit Improvised Explosive Device (IED) in Sinka
Dheere area. The explosive is suspected to have been planted by Al-Shabaab fighters who are fighting to
topple the UN-backed Somali Federal Government based in Mogadishu.

Durban's police bomb squad rushed out to a private college on Tuesday when a threat was
reported at the Overport Drive campus. Students were evacuated but no explosives were found.

A suspicious parcel was found at a De Waterkant Street establishment in Green Point on
Wednesday following a bomb threat was "negative". The staff member told him that an email had been
received from a "strange email domain", from a sender using an Islamic name.

Police say a mental health patient visiting the hospital for a routine check-up apparently
brought a bag with a plastic hand grenade connected to batteries. While the doctor was examining the
patient, he noticed some wires from the bag. He checked and sensitised everyone at the hospital to go out
of the building so that they can call the relevant people to come and verify what is in the bag.

The government must deploy more security personnel as we draw near the harmonised
elections in a couple of weeks to come. We seem to be heading for a political turbulence in the country as
we notice some kind of political disturbances and there is need to quickly attend to this problem as soon
as possible. The bombing at White City Stadium in Bulawayo where Emmerson Mnangagwa was targeted
as he was leaving the podium is such a sad event to experience. The bomb explosion is also showing us
how fragile and disharmony is within the Zanu-PF party. Unless its leaders address these factional
challenges.

