Greenville County deputies and the bomb squad were called to a bank robbery on White Horse
Road. Deputies said a man wearing a red, white, and blue shirt and jeans entered the bank carrying a
suspicious device with wires protruding from it and demanded cash. The man fled with an undisclosed
amount of cash and left the bank on foot. The bomb squad was called in to inspect the device. Deputies
said the hazardous device unit has rendered the object safe and no actual explosives were inside.

Police evacuated buildings, closed off a section of Lincoln Street and called in a bomb squad
Friday afternoon when a suspicious package was spotted near a gas line behind Rails Restaurant. Police
said the package, described as tube-shaped and filled with sand, was not an explosive, although it had
been made to look like one as part of a hoax.

Police have given the "all-clear" after a suspicious package was reported Friday morning in
Bricktown. The bomb squad was sent to the 200 block of E Main Street near the Bricktown police
substation.

Our sister station WKYT reports the Kentucky State Bomb Squad and the Bureau of Alcohol,
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives (ATF) responded to reports of a hazardous device. Employees of the
Tractor Supply Company on Penny Lane in Williamsburg smelled smoke and saw a small fire early this
morning before the store opened around 5 a.m. The workers put out the flames and when police and
firefighters got there, they found a device near the fire. Authorities say that gadget was connected to
accelerant and had a timer with batteries. Officials investigated and found the hazardous device was not a
bomb, it only looked like one.

Bergen County's bomb squad had a busy Friday morning in Maywood after a trio of suspicious
bags were found in the same area. The Bergen County Sheriff’s Bomb Squad found both backpacks stuffed
with papers. Bomb Squad techs returned and found electronic equipment in the bag.

A fake bomb threat closed U.S. Highway 24 for more than four hours. The caller phoned the
threat to dispatchers Saturday night, saying a bomb had been planted on the bridge on Minturn's
Cemetery Road, leading to Little Beach Park.

What started out as a hazardous waste collection event in Kennewick, ended with a boom.
Benton County officials said Saturday morning a woman dropped off some chemicals--one of them being
the highly explosive picric acid. Bomb Squad members decided it was safest to bury the acid in the ground
and then detonate it.

The threat was called into the Kroger located 8039 US Highway 51 N. According to Millington
Police, they went through all the steps and made sure the scene was safe. People were evacuated for
precaution reasons, but no threat was found.

Police have reopened a section of Chesterfield Airport Road that was shut down after a
suspicious package was discovered. The Arson and Explosive units worked alongside local law
enforcements after a package was found in Chesterfield Airport Rd. Investigators confirmed the package
didn't contain harmful materials. The road was reopened after crews cleared the scene.

A Planet Fitness gym was evacuated over a joke Wi-Fi name that triggered a bomb scare in
Saginaw Township, Michigan. As a result, the gym was shuttered for three hours while the Michigan State
Police bomb-sniffing dogs were brought in to conduct a precautionary sweep of the area, which produced
nothing.

The check-in area of Terminal 6 at Los Angeles International Airport was evacuated for about
an hour late Sunday after a man made a bomb threat. The bomb squad cleared the threat and allowed
people to reenter the terminal.

Police are investigating after someone called in a bomb threat to Hampton Roads Transit's
Norfolk administrative building. The threat was called in just over an hour before a scheduled meeting to
discuss the findings of HRT's Westside Transit Study, a year-long effort looking at the possibility of
connecting Tide light rail with Naval Station Norfolk. Nothing was found and police have cleared the scene.

Authorities are investigating after a suspicious bag was found at an Oklahoma City bus stop.
The bag was left at a bus stop. Oklahoma City police closed Meridian Ave., and the bomb squad responded
to the scene.

Police say a device found near a Pennsylvania apartment building looked like a bomb and
"contained materials that warranted its destruction.