Three homemade bombs were discovered and destroyed yesterday Friday in Jijel by a
detachment of the A.N.P. As part of the fight against terrorism, and through the exploitation of
intelligence, a detachment of the ANP discovered and destroyed, in El-Milia in the wilaya of Jijel / 5th RM,
three homemade bombs, tools and chemicals used in the manufacture of explosives, including 50 liters of
nitric acid.

A detachment of the People’s National Army (ANP) on Saturday discovered five shelters for
terrorists containing a weapon, ammunition and chemical products used in explosives manufacturing,
announced the National Defence Ministry.

Two caches containing explosives were destroyed Monday in Medea (91-km southwest of
Algiers), in a combing and search operation carried out by an Army detachment, the ministry of National
Defence said in a statement.

A homemade bomb was destroyed Monday in Khenchela by an Army detachment, the ministry
of National defence said Tuesday in a statement

The Egyptian armed forces and police have killed 32 militants in North and Central Sinai during
anti-terrorist raids over the past few days. Some 15 explosive deceives, planted for targeting Egyptian
soldiers, were detonated, according to the statement.

The death toll from a bomb attack on Saturday during a mass rally in support of Ethiopian
Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa stands at two. A total of 156 people have
been injured in the bomb blast, with 44 injured people still being treated at local hospitals among whom
five are suffering from critical wounds.

Earlier this month six police officers were killed when their truck run over a roadside bomb in
Liboi, Lamu County. Authorities blamed al-Shabab for that attack.

At least five General Service Unit (GSU) officers were killed by suspected al-Shabaab militants in
Liboi, Garissa County on Wednesday, June 6.Three other officers were left in a critical condition after the
vehicle they were traveling in was blown up by an improvised explosive device (IED).

A Kenyan legislator says eight police officers have died in his constituency after the vehicle they
were travelling in was hit by a roadside bomb planted by suspected extremists

Four soldiers of the Libyan eastern-based army were injured in a suicide bombing attack in the
eastern city of Darna, while another suicide attacker failed to reach his target.

A double car bomb suicide attack targeted a heavily populated neighborhood in the eastern
Libyan city of Darna on Tuesday, killing and injuring a number of civilians.

The Malian military neutralized 10 terrorists, recovered weapons, explosive devices and other
war materials,” after fighting in Karakinde in the Mopti region. The Malian army has recently regularly
spoken about the ‘neutralization of terrorists’ in the region but rights groups have raised the alarm, saying
they were extra-judicial killings.

Islamist militants raided the headquarters of a regional military taskforce in central Mali on
Friday afternoon, opening fire with rockets and guns and attempting to infiltrate the base. There were no
immediate details on casualties at the compound in Sevare used by the G5 Sahel, a mission created last
year to root out jihadist violence in West Africa’s semi-arid Sahel region, ministry spokesman Boubacar Diallo told Reuters. U.N. source in Sevare, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that the compound
was also hit by a car bomb but that gunfire had died down by mid-afternoon.