Border Police officers on Thursday night spotted a suspicious vehicle carrying two Palestinian
Arabs, residents of Hevron and Beit Jala, at the Ein Yael crossing in the Jerusalem area. A search of the
vehicle, which had Israeli license plates, discovered a pipe bomb, a knife and tens of thousands of shekels
in checks and cash. The vehicle was stopped and a police sapper was called to the scene to detonate the
bomb.

The American-Israeli man accused of making hundreds of bomb threats to Jewish community
centers in the United States is suspected of making another 100 hoax bomb threats in Israel from prison.

A Bishkek department store received a phone threat. All emergency services were deployed on
the scene and previous inspections the authorities declared false the alarm.

Unidentified assailants threw two hand grenades at a building under construction in the
northern Akkar region, the state-run National News Agency reported.

Lebanese police officials say an operative with Lebanon’s militant Hezbollah group was killed
when a bomb he was holding went off in his home in the country’s south.

A woman was injured in a bomb explosion in Dhanushadham Municipality-9 of Dhanusha
district. According to police, Tamang was injured when a bomb exploded while she was fetching fodders
from a jungle at Dharapani this morning, injuring her.

A 14-year-old boy has been critically hurt in a bomb blast at Tharuhat Rangasala near Madan
Bhandari Memorial Hall in Triyuga Municipality. According to police, a bomb exploded with a loud bang
after Paras Rai, who was returning home alone after grazing cattle in nearby area, tried to open an
unattended bag at a road.

A bomb went off outside an Indian consulate office in Nepal’s Biratnagar, just six kilometers
from the India-Nepal border on Monday night. There was no one in the office during the explosion. The
explosion took place at 10.20 pm and caused a hole in the compound wall towards the back of the office
building complex.

A bomb exploded today at the office of a hydroelectricity project being developed with Indian
assistance in eastern Nepal, an official said, weeks before its inauguration by Prime Minister Narendra
Modi. No one was injured in the blast and an investigation has been launched. This is the second blast within a month in Indian properties in Nepal. On April 17, a pressure cooker bomb went off near the
Indian Embassy field office in Biratnagar damaging the walls of the premises.

Two soldiers were martyred and two others sustained injurers in attacks and clashes in Khyber
Agency and Balochistan. The soldiers going for the help of the under attack security personnel at the check
post also came under attack from militants with an improvised explosive device (IED). Two soldiers were
injured when their vehicle was hit by the bomb planted on the roadside. The vehicle of the soldiers was
completely damaged in the blast. The injured soldiers were taken to hospital.

Counter Terrorism Department (CTD) Hazara region on Wednesday arrested a suspect terrorist
for attempt to carry out bomb blast at the main gate of government girls' high school Bhatiyala and seized
huge quantity of explosive during a search and strike operation at Havelian. CTD's official sources said that
the force arrested the suspected terrorist named Barakat Khan son of Mashal Khan, a resident of Banda
Bazdar village Tehsil Havelian and shifted him to unknown destination for investigation. Last month
Havelian police had foiled an attempt of blast at girls' school building and recovered a planted bomb and
later defused it.

The police during a successful action with the help of bomb disposal unit here Friday averted a
sabotage attempt and defused an explosive device planted in fields. The action was carried out by Nusri
Bharat police on information about presence of suspicious object in the fields. The police along with bomb
disposal unit rushed to the scene and recovered 3kg explosive device. The device was later defused by the
unit.