Three policemen were injured in a blast caused by a landmine, west of Anbar. A landmine from
the remnants of Islamic State war went off while a security patrol was passing in Akashat region in Qaim
town.

A paramilitary personnel was wounded in a bomb blast, northeast of Baquba. A member of alHashd al-Shaabi (Popular Mobilization Forces) was wounded as a bomb, placed on the side of the
agricultural road in Qurret Tabah region, exploded during a campaign launched at some regions.

Two Iraqi civilians were wounded on Thursday when an explosive device went off south of
Baghdad. A bomb planted near a sheep market in Wardiya, Madaen, south of the capital.

An Iraqi civilian was wounded on Saturday when an explosive device went of south of the
capital, Baghdad. a bomb fitted beneath a civilian-owned vehicle exploded while passing through Arab
Jabbour.

Two civilians were killed in a bomb blast, northwest of Kirkuk. a bomb from the remnants of
Islamic State war went off, today, near one of the houses in al-Atshana village in Dibs town.

A civilian was wounded Sunday in a car bomb blast in northern Baghdad. An explosive charge
fixed into a car went off at Bub al-Sham neighborhood in northern Baghdad.

Intelligence information in a special operation deployment seized a cache of ammunitions
containing 30 120 mm mortar rounds, 8 Katyusha rockets, 200 rocket propellants, 9 improvised explosive
devices and 4 launchers 40 mm in the Waeliya area west of Mosul.

An Iraqi taxi driver was killed on Monday after a bomb exploded near popular markets in Diyala
province. An explosive charge planted near busy street markets on the outskirts of al-Wajihiya district, in
northeastern Diyala.

Three people were wounded in a bomb blast, north of Baghdad. a bomb, was placed near the
industrial district in Taji region.

A Palestinian hurled explosives at Israeli soldiers protecting a crowd of Jewish worshipers in the
West Bank city of Nablus overnight, causing no injuries or damage. the military said that before the
worshipers entered the site, observations indicated “suspicious activity” in addition to the explosives that
were hurled. Soldiers arrested three suspects and found weapons, including rifle magazines, bullets and a
knife on a nearby roof.

A "powerful" explosive device was found in a Palestinian truck at a West Bank checkpoint. The
bomb was found after the driver was stopped for a routine check at the Rehian crossing between the
northern West Bank and Israel. The driver was arrested.