Three suicide bombers killed six people and wounded 37 late on Monday as they gathered at a
mosque in southeastern Niger after breaking the Ramadan fast. The attack occurred in the city of Diffa,
near Lake Chad and the borders with Nigeria, Chad and Cameroon. The area is a stronghold for the
militant group Boko Haram, which is fighting to establish an Islamic state in the region. More than 15,000
people have been killed and millions displaced by the conflict.

The Borno Police Command on Sunday said tragedy was averted when a suicide bomber heading
to the market mistakenly detonated an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) killing himself alone. He said
that the bomber was heading to the market where he saw massive crowd to detonate the IED strapped on
his body. “The male suicide bomber sighted massive presence of police and other security deployments at
Oando Filling station near Post Office and hurriedly detonated the explosives.

Adamawa state Commissioner of Information and Strategy, Mr Ahmad Sajoh, has confirmed
the death of a boy with two others injured following an explosion in Mubi town. the explosion suspected
to be from an Improvised Explosive Device (IED) occurred at a scrap materials gathering point along
kabang area of the town.

At least three persons were killed and four others injured when a suspected Boko Haram
suicide bomber struck in Maiduguri. The blast occurred at popular Baga Road area, precisely at Barka Da
Zuwa junctions in Maiduguri about 01:35 hours when a male suicide bomber blew himself up and killed
two civilians while injuring four.

Two blasts ripped through the town of Damboa in Nigeria’s Borno state targeting people
returning from celebrating the Eid al-Fitr holiday, in an attack bearing all the hallmarks of Boko Haram. At
least 31 people in a twin suicide bomb attack in a town in northeast Nigeria. Following the suicide
bombings, the jihadists fired rocket-propelled grenades into the crowds that had gathered at the scene of
the attacks, driving the number of casualties higher.

Police command has discovered an explosive device suspected to be Improvised Explosive
Device, IED at the Peoples Democratic Party. The discovery of the bomb led to an emergency security
meeting summoned by Governor David Umahi. The IED was a little bit old showing that it must have been
planted by the desperate opposition people in one of the days I was at the secretariat for a meeting but
God did not allow the thing to detonate and God will never allow it .

At least five people were killed and six others injured in a night-time Boko Haram raid and
suicide attack on a village in northeastern Nigeria. A male suicide bomber detonated his explosives among
a group of residents sleeping in the open in Tungushe village in Borno state at about 12:15 am. The blast
was followed by indiscriminate gunfire from Boko Haram militants lurking in the dark, said Mustapha
Muhammad, a civilian militia leader in the area.

A roadside bomb has killed a local district official in Mogadishu, the latest assassination
targeting Somali government officials and security personnel in the city. Ali Abdi Geedi known as
[Farayare] has died after a bomb planted on former perfume factory road struck a vehicle he was
travelling in.

A suicide car bomb explosion at a military base in Somalia injured seven soldiers, a military
official said, and Islamist group al Shabaab claimed responsibility for the attack. The suicide car bomb
exploded outside the base.

Seven soldier were wounded after blowing up a suicide car bomb at the military base near to
Kismayo area. The soldiers perceived some strange movement over this car and these started to fired
against this car, cause that this car detonated on the border of this base minimizing the casualty on it.

According to official information at least two people have been injured caused by a car blowing
up in Somalia´s capital, Mogadishu. The report informed that among the victims can find a man and a girl
as injured.

A car laden with explosives went off on Saturday night near the statue of Sayidka in
Mogadishu, the Somali capital, but no casualties were reported. Confirming the incident to Radio Shabelle,
Mohamed Abdi, a witness said the bomb exploded in the area shortly after the driver got off the car. A
Somali security force officer has escaped unhurt from an IED fitted into his private car which went off at
Sayidka vicinity. No casualties have been reported so far.
