Three people were hospitalized after a landmine exploded Thursday in the Tavush Province of
Armenia. It was found out that three persons were collecting Solomon’s Seal in the area nearby a military
defense outpost at the administrative area of Aygedzor village, during which a landmine exploded and
these persons sustained injuries.

The HALO Trust, the world’s largest humanitarian landmine clearance organization, confirmed
that three of its staff members were killed and two injured following an accidental detonation of an antitank landmine.

The ministry of emergency situations said no explosive device has been discovered in the
Yerevan City Hall after the apparent false call. The building was searched and it turned out that the threat
was false.

A woman was killed and three others injured as an abandoned mortar shell exploded in
Maidherchala area of Ghatail. Mohammad Moinuddin, officer-in-charge of Ghatail police station, said
Moyna collected several abandoned mortar shells from a firing range in Ghatail Cantonment and brought
them to home.

A minor boy was injured in a bomb explosion at Saharbati village in Gangni. ocals said Sumon
saw a ball-like object wrapped in scotch tape while collecting palms near their house. As he tried to pick it
up, the object which was a bomb went off with a big bang, leaving him injured.

Law enforcers detained three alleged operatives of “Neo JMB”, an ultra-radical offshoot of
banned militant outfit Jama'atul Mujahideen Bangladesh (JMB), in Dhaka’s Mohammadpur area. Police
also seized explosive materials including 100 detonators, a knife and a mobile phone from their
possession.

Police were today thrown into a tizzy when police control room received a call about a bomb at
Chief Minister V Narayanasamys residence here which later turned out to be a hoax.

An anonymous phone call was received at the Greater Chennai city police's control room,
threatening that a bomb was placed at the residence of leader of opposition and DMK working president
M K Stalin. Following this, bomb squad experts and police personnel rushed to his house at Alwarpet and
conducted a thorough check. The residence of Stalin's father, DMK president and former Tamil Nadu chief
minister M Karunanidhi at Gopalapuaram too was searched. At the end of the scrutiny, it came to light
that no explosive was placed. But still, the security has been tightened at both places.

Terrorists hurled grenade on a police-CRPF post at a village in Shopian district of Jammu and
Kashmir on Wednesday evening. The attack, carried out at Keegan village, was strongly retaliated by the
security personnel who fired upon the militants. Meanwhile, more details are awaited.

A bag found lying in the KSRTC Bus Stand yesterday afternoon sent panic waves among the
passengers as they started shouting bomb..bomb.. and ran helter-skelter resulting in tension for some
time in the bus stand. A bag was found lying below a stone bench in the bus stand. It was slightly open
with a few red coloured objects peeping out of it. Some of the passengers who spotted it became
suspicious that it must be a bomb and ran from the spot shouting.