By BBC Monitoring

Khabarovsk protests

Newspapers look at protests continuing in Khabarovsk Territory caused by the local governor's arrest

Vedomosti: Editorial by Alexei Firsov "Khabarovsk may become Russia's Vendee" says that Khabarovsk may become a symbol of regional resistance like the French department of Vendee did when it rebelled against the republican authorities. The authorities do not have a plan for a situation when there are several protests running simultaneously, article says; p 6.

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Ivan Rodin article "Authorities testing methods of countering mass protests in Khabarovsk" says that another unauthorised rally against former Khabarovsk Territory governor Sergei Furgal's arrest was staged in Khabarovsk on 28 July. Again, it was not dispersed by police. But law enforcers are using a pinpoint approach to tighten a grip on some activists; p 3.

Kommersant: Ernest Filippovsky interview with acting Khabarovsk Territory governor Mikhail Degtyaryov "'Entire country watching region'" who speaks about his meetings with locals protesting against former governor Furgal's arrest on murder charges and about plans to resolve the conflict; p 3.

Novaya Gazeta: Irina Tumakova article "'We all had weapons back then'" features an interview with a close friend of Yevgeny Zorya, the businessman with whose murder Furgal is charged. The interviewee expresses doubt about the allegations about Furgal's guilt that Zorya's widow has voiced in a recent interview. "She looked like a person speaking under pressure," the interviewee said.

Ex-journalist suspected of having Covid-19

Novaya Gazeta: Article by the member of the presidential human rights council Leonid Nikitinsky "This is disease of system" comments on the reports that former journalist Ivan Safronov charged with state treason is being kept in isolation as he may have been infected with Covid-19. If his Covid-19 positive status is confirmed, society should insist that pre-trial arrests for non-violence cases should be unacceptable, article says.

US-Russia security talks

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Gennady Petrov article "Moscow, Washington repeating 'reset'" says that "for the first time in 10 years, the US and Russia are trying to come to agreement on stopping the arms race". Although the beginning of the talks in Vienna was quite positive, experts doubt that tangible results can be achieved; pp 1, 6.

YouTube blocks Orthodox TV channel

Moskovsky Komsomolets: Andrei Vladimirov article "Beat your own people for others to fear" reports on a round-table discussion at the Russian Public Chamber headlined "Google corporation: New kind of digital censorship". The participants slammed the blocking by YouTube of the account of the Russian conservative Orthodox online TV channel Tsargrad TV, and suggested toughening censorship on the internet in Russia; p 1.

Environment

RBC: Timofey Dzyadko interview '"Our attitude to Nornickel is not biased"' with Natural Resources Minister Dmitry Kobylkin who looks at the aftermath of a fuel spill near Norilsk, at a record high fine levied on Nornickel and at criticism of the waste management reform, among other things.

Human rights

Vedomosti: Yelena Mukhametshina article "ECHR communicates first complaints over Moscow protests in 2019" says that the European Court of Human Rights has communicated complaints of 17 participants in the 2019 summer protests in Moscow who were fined for taking part in the rallies.

Covid-19: Economy

Kommersant: Dmitry Butrin article "Savings mask" says that in response to the Covid-19 epidemic and resulting restrictions, households have increased savings from 8.8 per cent in January-March up to 23 per cent in April-June; p 1.

Kommersant: Anastasia Manuylova article "Inequality not only in money" says that experts of the Higher School of Economics say that it is possible that the Covid-19 epidemic will not influence the level of financial inequality in Russia due to the government's support measures; p 2.

Domestic political

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Daria Garmonenko article "Candidate from Shiyes being barred from Arkhangelsk governor election" says that candidate Oleg Mandrykin nominated by the non-systemic opposition to run for Arkhangelsk Region governor still needs five signatures of municipal deputies on the last day when signatures can be submitted. At the same time, polls being conducted in the region embrace seven other candidates, but not Mandrykin, which, according to the opposition, shows the authorities' determination to bar him from the election. The non-systemic opposition has stood up to his defence and threatened to stage protests similar to the ones in Khabarovsk over former governor Furgal's arrest; pp 1, 3.

Domestic economic

Kommersant: Diana Galiyeva article "Audit Chamber goes over procurement" says that the Audit Chamber has revealed that the state procurement system is not efficient enough and put the blame on inflexible and constantly changing laws; p 2.

Vedomosti: Alexandra Koshkina article "Number of instances of violation during state procurement drastically increases" says that the Audit Chamber's check has revealed 8.8-per-cent growth in the number of instances of violation in the course of state procurement in 2019.

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Anatoly Komrakov article "Authorities draw red line between working, non-working pensioners" says that the pensions of 14 million working pensioners will be adjusted based on an inflation level as at 1 August, but they will be able to get the increment only after they resign. Only pensioners officially not employed will get more or less fair adjustment. Experts criticise the approach and point out that the actual inflation rate is higher than the official figures; pp 1-2.

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Mikhail Sergeyev article "Central Bank expects 'quick rebound' only in early 2022" says that first deputy chairman of the Central Bank Ksenia Yudayeva forecasts recovery of Russia's economy to the level of 2019 only in January-March 2022; pp 1-2.

Kommersant: Natalia Skorlygina and Yevgeny Zaynullin article "More railway-expensive" says that Russian Railways has lost optimism as to the prospects of cargo traffic in the next five years and looks at how the company is going to cope with the crisis; p 1.

Vedomosti: Yekaterina Shokhina article "Corrupt officials' money to go to Pension Fund" says that the Justice and Finance ministries have drafted amendments that make it possible to remit money illegally obtained by citizens to the Pension Fund.

Armenian premier's interview

RBC: Ilya Doronov's interview with Armenian Prime Minister Nikol Pashinyan who speaks about the situation on the Armenia-Azerbaijan border, about clashes between Armenians and Azerbajanis in Moscow, the fight against the coronavirus and about RT head Margarita Simonyan's statements posted in the internet.

Russia-West

Izvestia: Unattributed report "Pushkov assesses suggestion that more sanctions be used against Ukraine" featuring head of the Federation Council commission for information policy Alexei Pushkov's comment on a bill tabled with the State Duma that suggests that Russia should "step up use of economic sanctions" against the countries that apply sanctions against Moscow.

Ukraine's east

Novaya Gazeta: Olga Musafirova article "Zelensky being pressured from all sides" wonders if "it is possible to bring peace to Donbas without betraying Ukraine's national interests.

Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Pyotr Likhomanov article "Day without firing" focuses on the first day of an indefinite ceasefire in Ukraine's east and says that the Ukrainian military are discontent over the ceasefire; p 6.

Azerbaijan, Turkey to hold drills

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Vladimir Mukhin article "Turkish military ready to neutralise Russian base in Armenia" says that Baku and Ankara are to start a large-scale military exercise near Nagorny Karabakh and wonders "if the joint exercise is a prelude to a possible war against Armenia"; pp 1-2.

Kommersant: Kirill Krivosheyev and Ayk Khalatyan article "Turkish-oriented" says that the military drills of Azerbaijan and Turkey are supposed to demonstrate Ankara's solidarity with Baku in its conflict with Armenia; p 4.

Belarus

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Anton Khodasevich article "Lukashenko trying to ensure law enforcers' support" says that Belarusian President Lukashenko continues his meetings with law enforcers. Earlier he admitted the possibility of using the army to suppress protests; pp 1, 5.

Moskovsky Komsomolets: Andrei Kamakin article "Belarus as foreboding" says that the current political crisis ahead of the presidential election in Belarus is important for Russia as it makes it possible to understand the breaking point of our own political system; p 5.

Vedomosti: Konstantin Glikin article "Belarusian president signals he is ready for tough measures against opposition" says that experts forecast protest voting in the upcoming presidential election in Belarus. In order to ensure the re-election of Lukashenko, vote rigging will be used, which will inevitably trigger mass protests that are most likely to be suppressed.

North Korea

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Vladimir Skosyrev article "Nuclear bomb to protect North Korea from enemies" says that North Korean leader Kim Jong-un has said that the country's nuclear arsenal is a solid security guarantee that makes sure that "there will not be any war on this land again". At the same time, Pyongyang says it does not oppose disarmament if there is no threat to the country. If US President Trump is re-elected, there is still a chance for the North Korean problem settlement; if not, there is basically no hope for the settlement, pundit Konstantin Asmolov said; p 6.

US

Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Alexander Gasyuk article "Corona congress" looks at how the Covid-19 pandemic will affect the US Democratic Party's congress where Joe Biden will be officially nominated to run for president; p 6.

Syria

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Igor Subbotin article "Pentagon looking for foothold in northeastern Syria" focuses on reports in Arab media outlets saying that the US-led international coalition is boosting its military presence in the Syrian province of Hasakah. This is bad news for Moscow that counts on at least partial pullout of the US military from Syria's east; p 6.

Rossiyskaya Gazeta: Yury Gavrilov article "Patrolling border" says that the Russian and Turkish military patrolled the Syrian-Turkish border on 28 July; p 5.

Russia-Egypt

Kommersant: Sergei Sergeyev article "They blow up, then impose fines" says that Egypt's court of appeal has imposed a fine on Egyptian lawyers of relatives of the Russians who died during the crash of the A321 aircraft in 2015; p 4.

Afghanistan

Nezavisimaya Gazeta: Editorial "US's withdrawal from Afghanistan becomes challenge to Russia" says that the US troops' withdrawal from Afghanistan does not resolve problems with security there. On the contrary, it will aggravate them. It is obvious that the settlement of the Afghan issue is possible only with the participation of all powerful regional players: Pakistan, China and India in addition to Russia and the US; p 2.

Sources: as listed. Inclusion of items in this list of significant reports from some of the day's main Russian newspapers does not necessarily mean that BBC Monitoring will file further on them

BBC Mon FS1 yg/ym