Gulf of Aden Security Review
A regularly updated review of both Yemen and the Horn of Africa covering topics related to security, governance, and militant activity.
October 07, 2020
Yemen: Saudi-led coalition claims destroying al Houthi drone boat in Red Sea; Hadi government–aligned forces claim regaining al Houthi–held territory near al Hazm city; Saudi-led coalition reportedly conducts airstrike in Sa’ada governorate

Horn of Africa: Suspected al Shabaab militants shoot and injure Kenyan civilians in Mandera County; SNA claims killing al Shabaab militants in Lower Shabelle region; Somali intelligence official reports al Shabaab’s release of kidnapped Cuban doctors

Yemen Security Brief:

The Saudi-led coalition claimed destroying an 
ORGANIZATION
al Houthi Movement
THE AL HOUTHIS ARE THE DE FACTO RULING FACTION IN YEMEN’S CE...
al Houthi remote-controlled improvised explosive device boat, known as a drone boat, offshore from al Hudaydah governorate’s Port Salif in the southern Red Sea on October 5. Coalition forces last reported intercepting an al Houthi drone boat on the Red Sea in late August.[1]

Forces aligned with the internationally recognized Yemeni government of 
PERSON
Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi
HE IS THE INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED PRESIDENT OF YEMEN. ALT...
Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi claimed regaining al Houthi–held territory near al Hazm city, the capital of northern Yemen’s al Jawf governorate, on October 7. Al Houthi militants seized al Hazm city in March.[2]

Al Houthi–aligned media reported that the Saudi-led coalition conducted an airstrike in Manabah district in northern Yemen’s Sa’ada governorate on October 7. The airstrike allegedly caused five civilian casualties. Saudi-led coalition forces reportedly launched an airstrike targeting al Houthi militants in Sa’ada governorate in late September.[3]

Horn of Africa Security Brief:

Suspected 
ORGANIZATION
Al Shabaab
AL SHABAAB IS AL QAEDA’S AFFILIATE IN SOMALIA AND OPERATES P...
al Shabaab militants opened fire on a commuter bus in Kutulo area of northeastern Kenya’s Mandera County along the Kenyan-Somali border on October 6. The attack injured at least four people. Kenyan Defense Forces claimed killing five al Shabaab militants in Mandera County in late September. [4]  

The Somali National Army (SNA) claimed killing at least ten al Shabaab militants, including two senior militant officials near Barire town in southern Somalia’s Lower Shabelle region on October 6. The SNA previously claimed killing al Shabaab militants in Barire town in late September.[5]

A Somali intelligence official claimed that al Shabaab released two Cuban doctors in early October that the group kidnapped a year and a half ago in Mandera County. An official from Cuba’s foreign ministry denied that al Shabaab has released the doctors.[6]