Gulf of Aden Security Review
A regularly updated review of both Yemen and the Horn of Africa covering topics related to security, governance, and militant activity.
October 09, 2020
Yemen: Unspecified security forces in al Mahrah governorate reportedly impose increased security measures in al Mahrah; Saudi-led coalition allegedly conducts airstrikes on al Houthis in Ma’rib governorate; Twitter suspends al Houthi–run news account; UN Special Envoy to Yemen calls for end to al Houthi and Hadi government–aligned clashes in al Hudaydah governorate

Horn of Africa: KDF reportedly conducts airstrike targeting civilians in Gedo region; Somali foreign minister denies reports of al Shabaab releasing kidnapped Cuban doctors; unknown attackers target Ethiopian ethnic minorities in western Ethiopia

Yemen Security Brief:

Unspecified security forces in eastern Yemen’s al Mahrah governorate reportedly announced that they are imposing increased security measures in the governorate’s Shahan district on October 7. A Yemeni media outlet reported that security forces in the governorate banned locals from carrying weapons out of fear that 
ORGANIZATION
AQAP
AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN PENINSULA (AQAP) FORMED IN JANUARY 2...
al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula (AQAP) would carry out an attack in al Mahrah. Saudi-led coalition forces reportedly raided an alleged AQAP cell in al Ghaydah city, the capital of al Mahrah, on October 2.[1]

The Saudi-led coalition reportedly conducted airstrikes targeting 
ORGANIZATION
al Houthi Movement
THE AL HOUTHIS ARE THE DE FACTO RULING FACTION IN YEMEN’S CE...
al Houthi militants in Rahba in northern Yemen’s Ma’rib governorate on October 9. Coalition forces previously targeted al Houthi militants with airstrikes in Rahba on October 5.[2]

Twitter suspended al Masirah TV’s account, an al Houthi–run news outlet, for an unknown violation of the platform’s rules on October 7. Twitter officials have not yet commented on why they suspended the account.[3]

UN Special Envoy to Yemen Martin Griffiths called for a halt to clashes between forces aligned with the internationally recognized Yemeni government of 
PERSON
Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi
HE IS THE INTERNATIONALLY RECOGNIZED PRESIDENT OF YEMEN. ALT...
Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi and al Houthi militants in al Hudaydah governorate on October 8. The announcement followed a week of intensive clashes between the warring sides in al Hudaydah’s al Durayhimi district.[4]

Horn of Africa Security Brief:

Kenyan Defense Forces (KDF) conducted an airstrike targeting unarmed civilians in Somalia’s southwestern Gedo region on October 8, according to a local Somali outlet. The local report claimed the strike killed at least one person and injured four others. KDF and Somali National Army (SNA) forces exchanged gunfire in Gedo region in late September.[5]

The head of security in Ethiopia’s western Benishangul-Gumuz regional state confirmed on October 8 that unknown attackers targeted ethnic Amhara and Agaws in Benishangul-Gumuz. The attacks allegedly killed fourteen civilians and fourteen unspecified militia members. Ethiopian security forces arrested hundreds of people in early October for allegedly planning violent attacks during the ethnic Oromo annual festival in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa.[6]

Somalia’s foreign minister denied on October 7 reports that 
ORGANIZATION
Al Shabaab
AL SHABAAB IS AL QAEDA’S AFFILIATE IN SOMALIA AND OPERATES P...
al Shabaab released two Cuban doctors it kidnapped in Kenya in April 2019. The Associated Press corrected a report it released earlier on October 7 that cited a Somali official claiming al Shabaab released the two doctors.[7]