Gulf of Aden Security Review
A regularly updated review of both Yemen and the Horn of Africa covering topics related to security, governance, and militant activity.
September 16, 2020
Yemen: AQAP produces chant praising JNIM; al Houthi delegation leaves Sana’a for Switzerland in anticipation of UN-led peace talks with Hadi’s government; Hadi government–aligned forces claim retaking al Houthi–held territory in Sana’a governorate

Horn of Africa: Al Shabaab releases video of fighters giving livestock to civilians; al Shabaab publishes photos of SVBIED attack on joint US-Somali convoy in Lower Jubba region; al Shabaab militants kill leader of Somali militia in Hiraan region; suspected al Shabaab militants detonate roadside bomb in Mogadishu

Yemen Security Brief:

Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula’s (AQAP) audio production unit released a chant on September 8 praising al Qaeda’s Malian affiliate Jama’at Nusrat al Islam wa al Muslimeen. 
ORGANIZATION
AQAP
AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN PENINSULA (AQAP) FORMED IN JANUARY 2...
AQAP published a report assessing the effects 9/11 had on the US in its weekly magazine “Inspire” on September 13.[i]

An 
ORGANIZATION
al Houthi Movement
THE AL HOUTHIS ARE THE DE FACTO RULING FACTION IN YEMEN’S CE...
al Houthi delegation flew from the Yemeni capital to the Swiss capital on September 15. The al Houthi officials are to meet with a delegation from the internationally recognized Yemeni government of Abdu Rabbu Mansour Hadi and the UN Envoy to Yemen. The meeting is intended to result in a prisoner exchange, which is one of the key stipulations of the December 2018 Stockholm Agreement.[ii]

Hadi government–aligned forces claimed retaking control of al Houthi–held areas in Nihm district in central Yemen’s Sana’a governorate on September 15. Hadi government–aligned forces clashed with al Houthi militants in Nihm district in mid-August.[iii]

Horn of Africa Security Brief:

Al Shabaab released a two-part video of its militants giving livestock to Somali civilians as part of a video series on September 10 and 14, respectively. The footage showed fighters distributing camels, sheep, and other animals to civilians living under their control across Somalia.[iv]

Al Shabaab published photos on September 14 of the aftermath of its suicide vehicle-borne improvised explosive device attack targeting a joint US-Somali convoy in Somalia’s Lower Jubba region on September 7. The attack occurred in Janaa Cabdalle area, roughly 30 miles west of Kismayo city. It killed three Somali soldiers, wounded two others, and one American soldier.[v]

Al Shabaab killed the leader of the Ma’awisley militia near Beledweyne town in central Somalia’s Hiraan region on September 13. Somali officials reported that 20 
ORGANIZATION
Al Shabaab
AL SHABAAB IS AL QAEDA’S AFFILIATE IN SOMALIA AND OPERATES P...
al Shabaab militants raided the leader’s house before shooting him. Local reports claimed that the Ma’awisley militia attacked al Shabaab militants in Hiraan region in March.[vi]

Suspected al Shabaab militants detonated a roadside bomb in the Somali capital, Mogadishu, on September 15. The explosion killed six civilians and wounded two others. Al Shabaab attacked an African Union Mission to Somalia base outside Mogadishu in early September.[vii]

View Citations