The week ahead
By Marjorie Censer / August 3, 2020 at 5:00 AM
 Share
Defense contractors continue to report quarterly earnings this week, while the Space and Missile Defense Symposium goes virtual. The Senate Armed Services Committee is slated to consider several Pentagon nominees.

Tuesday

The Space and Missile Defense Symposium takes place virtually. Among those slated to speak are Adm. Charles Richard, the commander of U.S. Strategic Command, and Vice Adm. Jon Hill, director of the Missile Defense Agency.

BWX Technologies, Kratos Defense & Security Systems, Leidos and TransDigm Group executives are set to discuss quarterly earnings.

Space News hosts a virtual event on the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency's Blackjack program, featuring Stephen Forbes, the deputy program manager.

The Senate Armed Services Committee will hold a hearing to consider the nominations of John Whitley to be director of cost assessment and program evaluation; Shon Manasco to be under secretary of the Air Force; and Michele Pearce to be general counsel of the Army.

The Senate Armed Services cybersecurity subcommittee will hold a hearing on the findings and recommendations of the Cyberspace Solarium Commission.

Wednesday

Defense Secretary Mark Esper speaks at a virtual Aspen Security Forum.

Pentagon Chief Information Officer Dana Deasy speaks at the 2020 Forbes CIO Summit Virtual Series.

Maxar Technologies and Parsons executives are slated to discuss quarterly earnings.

Kratos executives are set to present at a virtual conference hosted by Jefferies.

Space News hosts a webinar on the Space and Missile Systems Center. Scheduled to speak are SMC Portfolio Architect Col. Russell Teehan and Director of Innovation and Prototyping Col. Joseph Roth.

Defense News hosts an event on missile defense modernization.

Thursday

The Senate Armed Services Committee will hold a hearing to consider the nominations of Jason Abend to be Defense Department inspector general; Bradley Hansell to be deputy under secretary of defense for intelligence and security; Lucas Polakowski to be assistant secretary of defense for nuclear, chemical, and biological defense programs; and Louis Bremer to be assistant secretary of defense for special operations/low-intensity conflict.

Huntington Ingalls Industries, KBR, PAE and Perspecta executives are scheduled to discuss quarterly earnings.

Leidos and Parsons will present at the Jefferies virtual conference.

The Center for Strategic and International Studies and the U.S. Naval Institute host an online event with Vice Adm. James Kilby and Lt. Gen. Eric Smith.