Wanted
Information that brings to justice…
Photo of Sirajuddin Haqqani
Sirajuddin Haqqani
Up to $10 Million Reward


Sirajuddin Haqqani currently leads the day-to-day activities of the Haqqani Network. During an interview with an American news organization, Sirajuddin admitted planning the January 14, 2008 attack against the Serena Hotel in Kabul that killed six people, including American citizen Thor David Hesla.

Sirajuddin also admitted to having planned the April 2008 assassination attempt on Afghan President Hamid Karzai. He has coordinated and participated in cross-border attacks against U.S. and Coalition forces in Afghanistan. He is believed to be located in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas of Pakistan.

The U.S. Department of State designated Sirajuddin Haqqani a Specially Designated Global Terrorist under Executive Order 13224 in March 2008.

The Haqqani Network is a militant group founded by Jalaluddin Haqqani, an Afghanistan-battlefield commander from the 1980s who fought against the Soviet Union. The Haqqani Network is allied with the Afghan Taliban and al-Qaida and seeks to reestablish Taliban rule in Afghanistan. The Haqqani Network is primarily based in North Waziristan, Pakistan, and conducts cross-border operations into eastern Afghanistan and Kabul. The Haqqanis are considered the most lethal insurgent group targeting Coalition and Afghan forces in Afghanistan.

The Haqqani Network has planned and carried out a number of significant kidnappings and attacks against U.S. and Coalition Forces in Afghanistan, as well as Afghan government and civilian targets. Some of the group’s most notorious attacks include an attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul in June 2011, which killed 11 civilians and two Afghan policemen; a September 2011 truck bombing in Wardak Province, Afghanistan, which wounded 77 U.S. soldiers; a 19-hour attack on the U.S. Embassy and International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) headquarters in Kabul in September 2011, which killed 16 Afghans, including at least six children; a June 2012 suicide bomb attack against Forward Operating Base Salerno, which killed two U.S. soldiers and wounded more than 100; and a 12-hour siege of the Spozhmai Hotel in Kabul in June 2012, which resulted in the death of at least 18 Afghans, including 14 civilians.

The U.S. Department of State designated the Haqqani Network a Foreign Terrorist Organization on September 19, 2012.